format version:	1.2										date:	12/15/15										age units:	ka (before AD2000)																					Holocene Stage	block	100	USGS-Named									TOP	0										Late	4.2										Middle	8.2										Early	11.784										Late Pleistocene	130																				Cultural Stage (generalized)	block	100	USGS-Named									TOP	0										AD	2		"The Iron Age terminated in any area with the beginning of the historical period and the greatly increased production of written documents. This occurred during the Hellenic period in Greece, the spread of the Roman Empire elsewhere in Europe (e.g., AD 43 in England), the start of Confucianism in China and the beginning of Buddhism in India. (Catt and Maslin, 2012)"								Iron Age	3.2		"Bronze was progressively replaced by iron for the manufacture of artifacts from about 4.0 ka in Anatolia, 3.2 ka in Mesopotamia, parts of the Indian Subcontinent and eastern Europe, 2.8 ka in western Europe and China and 2.3 ka in Japan (Catt and Maslin, GTS2012)"								Bronze Age	5.3		"The earliest bronze artifacts, and therefore the local beginning of the Bronze Age, date from about 5.3 ka in Mesopotamia (the Akkadian culture) and north Caucasus (the Maykop culture), from 5.2 ka in the Aegean region, Egypt, Anatolia and Levant, from 5.0 ka in the Indus valley (the Harrapan culture), from 4.3 ka in mainland Europe, from 4.2 ka in Britain, from 4.0 ka in China (the Majiayao culture) (Catt and Maslin, GTS2012)"								Neolithic	8		"Later, the small early Neolithic settlements along the Euphrates developed into larger towns of the Urukian civilization.  The first of these dating from ~ 8 ka was probably the walled town of Jericho, which then had a human population exceeding 2000. About 6 ka, the much larger city of Uruk was built in southern Iraq; its buildings of kiln-fired bricks, often with internal walls adorned with mosaics, covered an area of 6 km2 and served a population probably exceeding 40 000."" (Catt and Maslin, GTS2012)"								Mesolithic-Neolithic transition	9		"Neolithic (8,000 - 3,000 BC): The New Stone Age is when people began to use ground stone tools, cultivate plants, and domesticate livestock; but before the use of metal for tools.  ""The start of the Neolithic is defined by the widespread initiation of serious farming methods, which strengthened the lifestyle based on long-term settlements, and led to early farmsteads and villages.  Later, the small early Neolithic settlements along the Euphrates developed into larger towns of the Urukian civilization.  The first of these dating from ~ 8 ka was probably the walled town of Jericho, which then had a human population exceeding 2000. About 6 ka, the much larger city of Uruk was built in southern Iraq; its buildings of kiln-fired bricks, often with internal walls adorned with mosaics, covered an area of 6 km2 and served a population probably exceeding 40,000."" (Catt and Maslin, GTS2012)"								Mesolithic	11.784		"By convention, the Paleolithic ends and the Mesolithic begins at the Pleistocene/Holocene boundary.  The term Mesolithic is used mainly in northern Europe; Epipalaeolithic is used elsewhere. The Mesolithic of most European areas was characterized by the production of large numbers of very small blades (microliths), which were often mounted singly on a shaft to form projectiles such as arrows, or in groups to form saw-like tools.  (Catt and Maslin, GTS2012)."								Late Paleolithic	40		"Blade flake tools (defines Upper Paleozoic) is from about 40,000 years to 10,000 years ago.  ""It was not until the late ice age cultures of the Cro-Magnon people and some of their contemporaries outside of Europe that long, thin, delicate blade flakes were commonly produced and used.""  (http://anthro.palomar.edu)"																																								Africa	:	Generalized African ages	Egypt	North Africa	West-Central-East Africa	South Africa																Generalized African ages	block	150	198/207/174		off							TOP	0		0								Spread of Islam	1.358		0								TOP	2.332		Top of Egyptian Dynasties								Egyptian Dynasties	5.15		0								Neolithic	9		"The period of prehistory when people began to use ground stone tools, cultivate plants, and domesticate livestock but before the use of metal for tools. It is the technical name for the New Stone Age in the Old World following the Mesolithic. In the Neolithic, villages were established, pottery and weaving appeared, and farming began."								Blade flake tools	45		"Blade flake tools (defines Upper Paleozoic) is from about 45,000 years to 10,000 years ago.  ""It was not until the late ice age cultures of the Cro-Magnon people and some of their contemporaries outside of Europe that long, thin, delicate blade flakes were commonly produced and used.""  (http://anthro.palomar.edu)"																		Egypt	:	Main Egypt Intervals	Egypt Events	Egypt Climate Intervals		"Majority of information is from: TourEgypt - History of Egypt [Click  <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">website</a> ] -- a very detailed, well-documented, on-line source."																Main Egypt Intervals	block	150	247/249/153			Generalized Lower through Upper Egypt						TOP	0										Islamic	1.358		"Abbasid Period (642-969 AD) of mainly Orthodox Sunni, Fatimid Period (969-1171 AD) of Shi'ite-dominated leadership.  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information (TourEgypt)"								Byzantine Period	1.672		"Byzantine Christian Period: The eastern half of the Roman Empire, based in Byzantium (later Constantinople, now Istanbul), an ancient Greek settlement on the European side of the Bosporus. (AD 330 to 1453).  Click [  <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/alexhis3.htm"">The Byzantine Period</a> ] for more information.   (Source = TourEgypt, The Byzantine Period)"								Roman Period	2.03		"Roman period:  The period of Roman political and military control, generally between 200 BC and 400 AD, but varying for different regions, depending on the date of conquest.  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information (TourEgypt)."								Ptolemaic	2.332		"Ptolemaic: Term describing Egypt during the Hellenistic era, when it was ruled by the dynasty of the Macedonian general Ptolemy I Soter (reigned 305/304-283/282 BC) and his descendants. The Ptolemaic period was a large-scale experiment in bureaucratic centralism and mercantilism. Egypt was ruled by Ptolemy's descendants until the death of Cleopatra VII on Aug. 12, 30 BC.  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information (TourEgypt)."								Late Period	2.664		"Late Period (Integration Period):  A phase of Egyptian history, c 664-332 BC comprising the 26th-31st Dynasties, stretching from the end of the Third Intermediate Period to the arrival of Alexander the Great. Shabaqo (716-702 BC), the second ruler of the Kushite 25th dynasty, exerted Nubian influence by moving the administrative center back from Thebes to Memphis.  ""The Nubians fall under the Assyrians invasion. The Greeks help re-establish order. A renaissance in the arts of the 25th Dynasty shows a return to the Old Kingdom style.""  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information.  (Source = TourEgypt, Word Chron (http://www.reference-wordsmith.com:80/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Late+period)"								--	3.069		"Third Intermediate Period (21st-25th dynasties). ""The capital moves from Tanis to Libyan, to Nubia, to Thebes, to SAIS, and then back to Nubia and Thebes.""  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information (TourEgypt)."								New Kingdom	3.539		"New Kingdom:  A period of Egyptian history comprising the 18th-20th Dynasties, c 1550-1070 BC.  Thutmose, Amenhotep, Ramesses dynasties.  ""Extreme prosperity and renaissance in art and building projects mark the beginning of this period. Towards the end of the 19th Dynasty the increasing power of the priesthood corrupts the central government. During the 20th Dynasty tomb robbing is done by officials. The priesthood becomes hereditary and begins to assume secular power. The government breaks down.""  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information (TourEgypt)"								--	3.759		"Second Intermediate Period is the 13th through 17th Dynasties.  Amosis I, the founder of Dyn. XVIII in 1575 BC ends this period.  ""Both the First and Second Intermediate dark periods begin with a chaotic series of insignificant native rulers. In both, intruders from Palestine cast their shadow over the Delta and even into the Valley. Also in both, relief comes at last from a hardy race of Theban princes, who after quelling internal dissension expel the foreigner and usher in a new epoch of immense power and prosperity.""  ""The Hyksos invade and conquer. Eventually the Theban princes regain power. Kamose defeats the Hyksos."" -- reworded from TourEgypt - Second Intermediate Period:  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/hsecin1a.htm"">Second Intermediate Period</a> ] for more information."								Middle Kingdom	3.986		"Middle Kingdom:  A period in Egyptian history of the 11th through 12th Dynasties, c 1986-1630 BC.  ""This period is marked with foreign trade and enormous building projects. There is a refinement in the making of jewelry. Prosperity and renaissance existed for a long period of time, but eventually, internal problems become apparent."" quote from TourEgypt - History of Egypt -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."								--	4.184		"First Intermediate Period is the 7th through 10th Dynasties. ""This was a very troubled time. There was a breakdown of centralized government, with many kings having overlapping reigns. Montuhotep established order from his capital at Thebes.""  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/hfirstin1a.htm"">First Intermediate Period</a> ] for more information. (Source: TourEgypt - First Intermediate Period)."								Old Kindom (pyramids)	4.65		"Old Kindom:  A period in Egyptian history including the 3rd through 6th Dynasties, c 2650-2150 BC.  The age of the Pyramid. The pyramids of Giza and Dahshur are built during this period.  Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."								Early Dynastic	5.15		"Early Dynastic Egypt -- Succeeds the Upper Egypt Predynastic and Lower Egypt Predynastic traditions, precedes the historic (Dynastic) period.  DASHED: Little actual history is known of the pharaohs of the early dynasties. Their monuments, however, are some of the most studied artifacts in the world. A chronological phase in southern Mesopotamia between c 2900-2330 BC, ending with the founding of the dynasty of Akka. Ceremonial style palattes with relief ornaments (particularly Dynasty 0) Mastabas – rectangulat mud-brick superstructures above kings' and official' tombs. Engraved wood, ivory, and stone cylander seals of the “Mesopotamian style” (also in use in the Old Kindom). First annal: Wooden and ivory labels with engraved or painted signs recording important events of a year. Thin walled stone jars. Facon Horus as the main royal deity. {Sources: TourEgypt:  Pharaonic Dynasty 1 -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/hdyn1.htm"">Dynasty 1</a> and <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/hdyn2.htm"">Dynasty 2</a>] for more information.   Other sources:  Encyclopedia, Pgs. 77, 78; and Wordsmith -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.reference-wordsmith.com:80/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Early+Dynastic)"">Early Dynasty</a>] ."								Naqadan Culture	6.5		"Upper Egypt Predynastic (Nagada Culture) -- Villages were located on the low terraces above the Nile floodplain and presumable on the floodplain and levees and sometimes along large tributary wadis.  In the Early Predynastic, burials in fetal position, wrapped in grass mats or skins and laid in simple oval pits with none to a few simple furnishings. Gradually, funerary became more elaborate, with the appearance of some graves with boxes and trays, rectangular mud-brick chambers, superstructures, and abundant funishings. Subterranean rock-cut tombs occur in some elite cemeteries.  There are several classes of handmade pottery that classify the various subperiods. Slate palettes were cut into rectangular and zoomorphic shapes and were probably used for grinding cosmetic pigments. Various hard stone were used to make disk and pear shaped maceheads and stone vassels. The stone vessels were manufactured in specialised areas and deposited in elite graves. ""Ripple-flaked"" flint or chert knives and ""fishtail""shaped blades were present. Some graves contained copper in the form of fishhooks and chisels, elephant and hippopotamus ivory was carved into figurines, amulets, combs and fetish objects.  Houses were circular, subrectangular, sometimes semi-subterranean with stone or mud-brick lined lower walls, ans sometimes rings of posts supporting skin-covered or plaited reed superstructures.  Excerpts from TourEgypt Feature Story ""Upper Egyptian Neolithic and Predynastic Religion and Rulers"" by Carolline Seawright -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/predynastic.htm"">Predynastic</a> ] for more information."								Bashendi pastorism	8.3		Bashendi A pastorism (sheep and goats).  Neolithic: bifacial core industry with hollow-based projectile points and denticulated sickles.								Masara	10.5	dashed	"Masara pastoralism.  The technology associated with this period are backed bladelets with end scrapers, perforators, burins, geometrics (in later phases only), pieces with continuous retouch, and denticulates as important tool classes. Levallois technology occurs as a minor element in most assemblages south of Luxor, with increasing frequency in the south. Limited work in bone, mostly simple awls and bipointed fish gorges. Use of red ocher for pigment.  Follows the Middle Paleolithic Egypt Tradition and precedes the Upper Egypt Predynastic and Lower Egypt Predynastic traditions.  "								Qadan	15		"Qadan (13,000 - 9,000 BC)  from the Second Cataract of the Nile to Tushka (about 250 km upriver from Aswan), actually have cemeteries and evidence of ritual burial. It is also during this time that the first great experiments in ordered agriculture began.  From TourEgypt ""Middle Paleolithic"" -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ebph2.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."								Fakhurian	17		"The Fakhurian industry (17,000 - 15,000 BC) was based entirely on microlithic tools. From TourEgypt ""Middle Paleolithic"" -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ebph2.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."								Halfan	20		"Halfan people, for it was much more than just a way of making tools, flourished between 18,000 and 15,000 BC on a diet of large herd animals and the Khormusan tradition of fishing.   From TourEgypt ""Middle Paleolithic"" -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ebph2.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."								Upper Paleolithic	32		"Little is known about the period from 40,000 - 17,000 BC. The growing barrenness of the Sahara would obviously cause many of the settlements to die of starvation, and once again survival of the human race in this area depended on the Nile.  From TourEgypt ""Middle Paleolithic"" -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ebph2.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."								Late Paleolithic (Aterian and Khormusan)	45		"Aterian Industry, named for the type site at Bir-el-Ater in Tunisia, began some time around 40,000 BC, about the middle of the pluvial, and ended just shy of 30,000 BC.  Aterian innovations included points for small spears characterized by a distinct plug on the bottom for a more secure fit and the spear-thrower. These new developments permitted increased efficiency in hunting large grazing animals.  The Khormusans with their small sharp points were also efficient hunters, as well as being gatherers and fishers, plus wild cattle (roughly twice as big as our domestic cattle), and fish from the Nile.  These two cultures, for such they were, existed almost side-by-side until the end of the pluvial.   Rrom TourEgypt ""Middle Paleolithic"" -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ebph2.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."																																								Egypt Events	event	150	247/249/163		off	"Majority of information is from: TourEgypt - History of Egypt [Click  <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ehistory.htm"">website</a> ] -- a very detailed, well-documented, on-line source."					FAD												Gamal Nasser	0.048		"Gamal Nasser returns Egypt to self-rule by native Egyptians in a 1952 coup.  TourEgypt Feature Story ""Happy 4th of July"" by Jimmy Dunn -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/nasser.htm"">Nasser</a> ] for more information."								Napoleon conquest in 1798. 	0.202										Seljuk Moslem conquest	0.829										Arabians conquer Alexandria	1.358										Constantine establishs rule from Byzantium (Istanbul) capital	1.672		"In 328 AD, Roman Emperor Constantine I transferred the capital of the Roman Empire to Byzantium, later called Constantinople and now called Istanbul. Click [ <a href=""http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=Byzantine+empire"">The Byzantine Empire</a> ] for more information. (Source = Archaeology Wordsmith, Byzantine empire)"								Conquest by Alexander the Great. 	2.332		"In 332 BC Alexander the Great took control of Egypt away from the Persians. He stayed only long enough to be properly named pharaoh before moving on. Source = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, page 32."								Psammetikhos I consolidates rule over Egypt	2.664		"Some Egyptologists place the 26th Dynasty in to Third Intermediate Period of Egypt's history, while others place it in the Late Period.  Certainly, when Psammetikhos began his rule of Egypt, things were still chaotic, with various rulers claiming power. But Psammetikhos would consolidate his rule over Egypt, and reign for about a half a century, returning Egypt to stability. (excerpt form TourEgypt Feature Story ""Psammetikhos I"" by Jimmy Dunn (http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/psamtik1.htm).  "								Amosis I	3.539		"TourEgypt -- Ahmose I, Founder of the 18th Dynasty and the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt (by Richard Warner) (http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/ahmose1.htm)"								Hyksos conquer Egypt	3.759		"Hyksos (""shepard kings"") conquer Egypt, and rule as 15-16 Dynasties.  See discussion on migrations from Palestine and origin of Hyksos rulers in last part of TourEgypt - Second Intermediate Period (http://www.touregypt.net/hsecin1a.htm)] and its Feature Story: Who Were the Hyksos (by Troy Fox) (http://touregypt.net/featurestories/hyksos.htm)"								Menthotpe I regains Double Crown	3.986										"Sanakhte or Nebka, establishes 3rd Dynasty"	4.65										Unification; Menes (Scorpion King?)	5.15		"Exactly who the first king of unified Egypt was is also difficult to say, or even when the actual unification occurred. Narmer, or Aha, may be the legendary ""Scorpion King"" Meni, or Menes. Artificacts suggest Unification sometime between 3150 and 3110 BC.  [from TourEgypt: Predynastic Period :  (http://www.touregypt.net/ebph5.htm) and Pharaonic Dynasty 1 : (http://www.touregypt.net/hdyn1.htm)].  See also TourEgypt Feature Story ""King Scorpion"" (by Marie Parsons) (http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/scorpionking.htm) and ""Who was Menes"" (by Jimmy Dunn) (http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/menes1.htm)"								Dynasty 0	5.3		"Naqada III Period, or Dynasty 0, is a particularly interesting segment of Predynastic Egypt because it is the real formative years just prior to the unification of Egypt.  [""Beware of Dynasty 0 kings' lists. Many such example exist, particularly on the internet, that definitively arrange these very early kings in some sort of order, such Crocodile, Iry-Hor, Ka, Scorpion and Narmer. Both the name and the order of these kings is only fairly certain to any degree for the very last king ""]  NOTE: sources did not provide age, so assumed to be about 150 yr before Dynasty 1.  Excerpts from TourEgypt Feature Story ""Naquada III, Dynasty 0"" by Jimmy Dunn -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/hdyn00.htm"">Dynasty 0</a> ] for more information."								Gerzeans (agriculture)	5.5		"Naqada II Period (also known as the Gerzean Period, beginning around 3500 BC), ""In the middle of the fourth millennium BC, the Naqada II period superceded the Naqada I. The Gerzeans had mastered the art of agriculture and the use of artificial irrigation, and no longer needed to hunt for their food. The people started live in towns, not just villages, creating areas of higher population density than ever before.  They traded with far distant peoples for copper and other goods (they traded much further than the previous two cultures) - silver, lapis lazuli, lead, cylinder seals were some goods traded for from Asia and Mesopotamia.""  Excerpts from TourEgypt Feature Story ""Upper Egyptian Neolithic and Predynastic Religion and Rulers"" by Carolline Seawright -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/predynastic.htm"">Predynastic</a> ] for more information."								Badari (semi-nomadic)	6.5		"Naqada I or ""Old Predynastic"" Period (also known as the Amratian Period, beginning around 4000 BC (or, 4500 BC -- see last sentence).  The Badari of Upper Egypt are believed to be the ancestors to the predynastic Egyptians in Upper Egypt. They lived at about 4400 BC and may have even been as far back as 5000 BC. Though they were a semi-nomadic people, they started to cultivate grain and domesticate their animals.  Succeeding the Badari, the Naqada people took over. They were one of the most important prehistoric cultures in Upper Egypt, and their development can be traced to the founding of the Egyptian state.  The Amratian (Naqada I) started as a parallel culture to the Badari, but eventually superimposed itself on the other, and finally replaced it. These, though, were the race thought of as the first 'true Egyptians', and dominated between 4500-3100 BC.""  Excerpts from TourEgypt Feature Story ""Upper Egyptian Neolithic and Predynastic Religion and Rulers"" by Carolline Seawright -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/predynastic.htm"">Predynastic</a> ] for more information."								"Organized, permanent settlements focused around agriculture"	7.4		"Predynastic: begins ca. 5500 BC. Predynastic denotes the period of emerging cultures that preceded the establishment of the 1st dynasty in Egypt.  Coarse, handmade pottery of alluvial silts with great amounts of organic and inorganic temper, occasionally decorated with incising and paint. Stone vessels.  Chalcolithic: blade industry with “twisted” bladelets, blade knifes. Round and rectangular house structures, mostly in wattle and daub technique, later in mud-brick architecture, occasionally semisubterranean or subterranean, circular storage pits.  ""However, scholars generally divide this period further into four periods: [the oldest is] known as the Chalcolithic or ""Primitive"" Predynastic Period (beginning around 5500 BC).""  From TourEgypt ""Predynastic"" -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ebph5.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information.  And from Encyclopedia Word Chron - Click [ <a href=""http://www.reference-wordsmith.com/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Predynastic"">pre-Dynastic</a> ] Follows the Late Palaeolithic Egyptian tradition, precedes the Early Dynastic tradition. "							LAD												Death of Cleopatra VII (absorbed into Roman empire). 	2.03		"Death of Cleopatra VII on Aug. 12, 30 BC.  Source = TourEgypt, The Roman Period (http://www.touregypt.net/alexhis2.htm)"								"Nectanebol II, last native Egyptian king, flees. Persian rule"	2.343		"Autumn of 343 BC, the Persian king conquers Egypt.   ""Egypt would not be ruled again purely by Egyptians until the 1952 revolt that brought President Nasser into power. ""  TourEgypt Feature Story: ""Nectanebol II, The Last Ancient Egyptian Native King"" (http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/nectanebo2.htm)."								Ramesses XI dies	3.069		"Ramesses XI ""reigned for some 28 years on the throne of Egypt between 1098  and 1070 BC, though to give him credit as the true king of the Two Lands throughout this period might be an exaggeration.""  TourEgypt Feature Story -- Ramesses XI, the Last New Kington Pharoah (by Jimmy Dunn) (http://touregypt.net/featurestories/ramessesxi.htm)"								"Sobeknofru, first female pharoah, dies"	3.759										Death of Pepi II; disintegration of Memphite regime	4.184		"According to tradition, Pepi II was the last ruler of Egypt's 6th Dynasty, and in fact the last significant ruler of the Old Kingdom prior to the onset of what Egyptologists call the Fist Intermediate Period. We are told that his reign of possibly 94 (some Egyptologist believe 64) years was the longest in ancient Egyptian history.  Both the Oxford History of Ancient Egypt and Peter A. Clayton, have his reign lasting from 2278 until 2184 BC. Tour Egypt - Pepi II, Last ruler of the 6th Dynasty and Egypt's Old Kingdom (http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/pepi2.htm)"							EVENT												Suez Canal opens	0.131										Rameses II (The Great)	3.279		"Ramesses' building accomplishments include Abu Simbel and the hypostyle hall at Karnak.  Among Ramesses' wives were Nefertari. Ramesses the Great lived to be 96 years old, had 200 wives and concubines, 96 sons and 60 daughters. excerpts from TourEgypt - Ramesses II (http://www.touregypt.net/19dyn03.htm)"								Tutankhamun	3.33		"Tutankhamun (King Tut) was not a major player in Egypt Pharaonic history, or at least, in comparison with other pharaohs.  In fact, prior to Howard Carter's discovery of his tomb, almost nothing was known of him (excerpt from TourEgypt Feature Story ""Tutankhomun (King Tut) by Jimmy Dunn (http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/tut.htm)"								Akhetaten (Amhotep IV)	3.352		Amenhotep IV (1352-1336 B.C.							"18th Dynasty), better known as Akhenaten, the new name he took early on in his reign-ushered in a revolutionary period in Egyptian history. The Amarna Interlude, as it is often called, saw the removal of the seat of government to a short-lived new capital city, Akhetaten (modern el-Amarna), the introduction of a new art style, and the elevation of the cult of the sun disc, the Aten, to pre-eminent status in Egyptian religion. This last heresy in particular was to bring down on Akhenaten and his immediate successors the opprobrium of later kings.""  excerpt from detailed account at TourEgypt - Amenhotep IV (http://www.touregypt.net/18dyn10.htm)"												Khufu (Cheops)	4.528		Khufu or Cheops (2551-2528 BC) was the second king of the 4th Dynasty and was the builder of the Great Pyramid of Giza. TourEgypt -- Khufu Feature Story (by Marie Parsons): http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/khufu.htm																		Egypt Climate Intervals	block	150	237/239/153		off							TOP	0.048										Dry Sahara desert	3.986										4.2 ka Cool (Ultra-Dry) event	4.184		Dry interval begins suddenly.  Simultaneous collapse of Akkadian empire in Mesopotamia.								Dry Sahara desert	5.15		"The Mediterranean transgressed, which should have appreciably reduced the Archaic Delta area, and an abrupt decline of the Nile discharge and flood levels (approx. during the Late Predynastic period – The First Dynasty). The Holocene 'climatic optimum' came to and end, and it grew considerable colder. The fall in temperature was accompanied by the onset of a dry period in Northeastern Africa, and during this period the Egyptian climate was probably hotter and more arid than at present. "								Rapid drying of Sahara	6.5										Wet Sahara (no desert)	8.1										8.2 ka Cool event (Dry)	8.2										Wet Sahara (no desert)	10.5		"Around 12,500 B.P., a sharp increase in rainfall in East and Central Africa caused high floods downstream along the Nile. Soon this monsoonal rainfall began to expand northward, and there is evidence of limited rainfall in Egypt beginning around 11,000 or 11,500 B.P.  [ENTERED BY CAT]"								Dry Sahara desert	32		"Most of the Late Paleolithic in the Nile valley occurs during the period of the Last Glacial maximum  and the following interval of deglaciation. During the maximum, Egypt was cold and hyperarid with little or no local rainfall and extensive dunes of windblown sand accumulating in the desert and in the valley. Rainfall in East Africa was also much less, which reduced the flow of the Nile, estimated to have been less than 20% that of today."								Mousterian Pluvial (wet)	50		"The development of these new stone industries and survival techniques, coupled with the Mousterian Pluvial (which was even greater than the Abbassian that preceded it) between 50,000 and 30,000 BC caused a widespread distribution of early human culture. (from TourEgypt ""Middle Paleolithic"" -- Click [ <a href=""http://www.touregypt.net/ebph2.htm"">History of Egypt</a> ] for more information."								Wet/Dry cycles (see Note)	230		"The Middle Paleolithic appears in Egypt during oxygen-isotope Stage 7 and persists through Stage 4 or possibly the beginning of Stage 3. Many changes in climate occurred during this long period of almost 200,000 years. Isotope Stages 7 and 5 are seen as warm interglacials, where as Stages 6 and 4, which correlate with glacial maxima, are cold and dry. At various times during the Middle Paleolithic, there was considerable rainfall in Egypt, in some periods as much as 500mm per year, apparently during or at the onset of the warmer episodes. There is good evidence for six of these wet intervals in the Eastern Sahra, each separated from the other by periods of aridity. It is likely that during the driest periods there was little or no rainfall in Egypt, and only the Nile valley was occupied. "																																								North Africa	:	Sudan	North Sahara	Central Sahara	_METACOLUMN_OFF																	Sudan	:	Main Culture Interval (Sudan)																				Main Culture Interval (Sudan)	block	150	210/180/200									TOP	0										Historic period	4.65		"Same time as beginning of main Egyptian kingdom.  From this point, Sudan history mirrors Egypt's."								Khartoum Neolithic	5.2		" Industry of Sudan dating to c 5200 BP and characterized by domesticated animals, pottery, and a special adze. Postdates the Early Khartoum tradition and precedes the historic period. Thin-walled, grit- or sand-tempered fine paste ceramics vessels, often with burnished exteriors and decorated with a wide variety of incised and impressed designs. Khartoum Neolithic ceramics tend to be less hard and not as well fired as Early Khartoum ceramics. Burnished ceramics also do not occur in Early Khartoum assemblages. The most popular ceramic decorations in the Kharoum Neolithic are impressed ""vees"" and zigzags. Other characteristic designs include horizontal and concentric semicircle incised and impressed decorations. Bone harpoons barbed on one side, with perforated bases, bone celts, and fish hooks. Disk beads carved from ostrich shells. Polished stone gouges and celts. Midden mounds ranging in size from 6000-40000 m2 containing lithics, ceramics, daub, bone and shell."								Saharo-Sudanese Neolithic	7.5		"The Saharo-Sudanese Neolithic appeared during a wet phase before 7500 until 4500 B.P. An arid phase c. 4500B.P. forced people with domestic stock to move southward, occupying the Sahel c. 4000 - 3000 B.P. "								Early Khartoum	8.5		"The peak of the Early Khartoum tradition corresponds closely with the early Holocene wet phase in Northern Africa, dating between 8500 – 7500 B.P.   Postdates the Aterian tradition and precedes the Khartoum Neolithic.  Early Khartoum: Source = Encyclopedia p.86, Word Chron: (http://www.reference-wordsmith.com/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Early+Khartoum)"																		North Sahara	:	Main Culture Interval (N. Sahara)	North Saharan Interval	Events (North Sahara)																		Main Culture Interval (N. Sahara)	block	150	210/180/200		off							TOP	0										TOP	3.5		TOP of the Neolithic of Caspian								Saharo-Sudanese Neolithic	8		"Impressed-decorated globular ceramics; a varied flaked stone toolkit, including projectile points, awls, scrapers, knives, and drills; grinding stones (both upper and lower), bored stones, and ground stone axes and adzes; stone and ostrich eggshell beads; ivory bracelets; bone tools.  Follows the Aterian and late Pleistocene-Early Holocene Maghreb traditions, precedes the historic period."								Neolithic of Capsian	10		"Follows the Late Pleistocene – Early Holocene  Maghreb tradition and precedes the North Africa Protohistoric Berber tradition.  A first category of pottery in two sizes, widely open, conical bottoms, thick belly walls, rims, and handles, land-snail-quartz tempers, limited stamped decorations; and a second large category of undecorated bottles, with restricted necks, without handles, on conical bottoms. Ostrich eggshell bottles with a polar or an equatorial perforation and tortoise-shield cups were preserved. Knapped and polished lithic equipment included different rocks for knives, saws, as well as other things. Polished bone tools were well developed. Local and exotic bone materials, ostrich eggshells, and tortoiseshells were used to make some items. Volcanic rocks for axes and adzes played a decisive role for the emergence of a new social order. Through artistic pictogrammic expression emerged a written protolanguage. based on figurative representations, sending specific messages. Feminine-idol sculpture and peculiar engraved animal species bear evidence to specific local information selected from an implicit general communication between shepherds. Burial patterns of mixed Proto-Mediterranean and evolved Mechtoid populations were preserved inside caves and rock shelters.  "								Late Pleistocene- Early Holocene Maghreb	20		"Stone tools made from flakes and blades, frequently microlitic, characterised by backing; microburin technique for the production of geometric forms; probably heat treatment of raw materials; and frequent use of red ochre to coat implements in some regional subtraditions, as well as bone, occasional marine shell and ostrich eggshell ornaments and ostrich containers. Sites are open air and in caves or rock shelters and frequently contain large numbers of human burials. "																		North Saharan Interval	block	150	210/180/200		off							TOP	3		Top of the North African Protohistoric								North African Protohistoric	4		TOP of the Neolithic of Caspian								Southern Mediterranean Neolithic	7.5		Follows the Late Pleistocene-Early Holocene Maghreb tradition and precedes the North African Protohistoric tradition. 								Late Pleistocene- Early Holocene Maghreb	20		"Stone tools made from flakes and blades, frequently microlitic, characterised by backing; microburin technique for the production of geometric forms; probably heat treatment of raw materials; and frequent use of red ochre to coat implements in some regional subtraditions, as well as bone, occasional marine shell and ostrich eggshell ornaments and ostrich containers. Sites are open air and in caves or rock shelters and frequently contain large numbers of human burials. "																		Events (North Sahara)	event	150	247/249/163		off						FAD												Capsian Cultural complex in inland northern Africa.	10		A Mesolithic/Stone Age (8000 BC-2700 BC) cultural complex prominent in inland northern Africa near the present border between Tunisia and Algeria. 								Microlithic stone tools	20		Follows the Aterian and precedes both the Neolithic of Caspian tradition and the Southern Mediterranean																		Central Sahara	:	Main Culture Interval (S.Sahara)																				Main Culture Interval (S.Sahara)	block	150	210/180/200	notitle	off							Historic period	5.5		Top of Saharo-Sudanese.								Saharo-Sudanese Neolithic	8		"The Saharo-Sudanese Neolithic appeared during a wet phase before 7500 until 4500 B.P. An arid phase c. 4500B.P. forced people with domestic stock to move southward, occupying the Sahel c. 4000 - 3000 B.P.  Impressed-decorated globular ceramics; a varied flaked stone toolkit, including projectile points, awls, scrapers, knives, and drills; grinding stones (both upper and lower), bored stones, and ground stone axes and adzes; stone and ostrich eggshell beads; ivory bracelets; bone tools. Follows the Aterian and late Pleistocene-Early Holocene Maghreb traditions, precedes the historic period."								Aterian	70		"Tanged(stemmed) points and other tanged tools that are often unifacial, although parial and fully bifacial examples occur. Both points and tools are often made from Levallois flakes. Tabalbalat points are also common. Blade technology was used at some sites. Notes: A number of regional subtraditions have been proposed. Because of the extremely poor chronological control for the Aterian, it is difficult to know whether differences reflect time or space.   Relative time period: Follows the Mousterian in the Maghreb and the “Upper Lavalloisian” in the Eastern Sahara. These industries are both Middle Paleolithic or Middle Stone age, with tools made predominantly from flakes and with similarities to the Mousterian of Europe and the Near East. In the Maghreb there appears to be a hiatus between the Aterian and the Iberomaurusian, an Epipaleolithic industry. In the western desert of Egypt, the Aterian is thought to have been followed by another Levallois-based complex: the “Epilevalloisian” (Khargan, Sheikh Mabruk Units)."								Middle Stone Age	150		"The second part of the Stone Age in sub-Saharan Africa, dating from c 150,000-30,000 years ago and roughly equivalent to the Middle Palaeolithic elsewhere in the Old World.  (http://www.reference-wordsmith.com/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?exact=1&terms=Middle%20Stone%20Age)"																		West-Central-East Africa	:	West Africa	Congo Basin	East Africa	Zimbabwe	_METACOLUMN_OFF																West Africa	:	Main Culture Interval (W. Afr.)																				Main Culture Interval (W. Afr.)	block	150	210/180/200	notitle								TOP	0.63		TOP of the West African Regional Development								West African Regional Development	1.25		"A general elaboration of trends noted during the preceding period, including increasing sedentism and urbanisation, social stratification, elaboration of burials, tumuli and megaliths, defencive works, and indications of inter- and intraregional long distance trade. In some areas, there is introduction of material culture associated with Islam. None of these features are present throughout the entire region, and the diversity of localised patterns that characterised the preceding period continued. Follows the West African Iron Age tradition and precedes the historic period. "								West African Iron Age	2.5		"Defined by the appearance of indigenous metallurgy, which in some areas does not make its appearance until the very end of the period considered. Ceramic figures are found in some areas. Settlement mounds, ""defensive"" works, and stone tumuli are associated with soem local traditions. although these features generally date toward the later part of the period and are more expressive of the succeeding period of regional development. Follows the West African Neolithic tradition and precedes the West African Regional Development tradition. "								West African Neolithic	4		"Domesticated animals and/or plants were exploited. Material culture includes pottery in association with ground stone tools. Early on, the pottery is most frequently deocorated with comb or punctate or cord-wrapped cord impressions applied all over the outer surface of the vessel. Simple vessel shapes are common, with rounded bottoms and a high percentage of uninflicted rims in many areas. These are all elements that are characteristic of earlier Holocene ceramics in the Sahara. The proportion of microliths in West African Neolithic assemblages is highly variable, and there is evidence that large flake tool industries and prepared core lithic technologies increase during this period. Follows the West African Late Stone Age, preceeds the West African Iron Age traditions. "								West African Late Stone Age	13		"The presence of microliths. (Includes larger flake tool assemblages previously known as Tumbian, Para-Tumbian, Guinea Neolithic, Neolithic Hoe cultures, and Sangoan.)  In areas where good quality stone is available, microliths occur in a limited number of standarised, geometric shapes. In areas where poor-quality raw material must be used, the assemblage consists of small, unstandardised flakes. There were some larger stone flaked tools, in some cases Levallois technology. Ceramics appear in the Late Stone Age assemblages between c. 6000-5000 B.P. Early on the pottery is mostly decorated with comb or punctate impressions all over the outside of the vessel. Simple shapes with rounded bottoms are common. There is a high percentage of uninflected rims. Ground stone axes appear at approximately 5500-5000 B.P. Follows the Middle Stone Age and precedes the West African Neolithic tradition. "																																								Congo Basin	:	Main Culture Interval (Congo)	Congo Basin Events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		Main Culture Interval (Congo)	block	150	210/180/200	notitle								TOP	0.5		TOP of the Central African Iron Age.								Central African Iron Age	2.35		"In Southern Cameroon and Gabon, the eariest Iron Age in broadly contemporary. with the recent Neolithic. In large parts of the inner Congo basin, the Iron Age appears to have been the first phase of Portuguese contact with the southwestern part of Central Africa, around A.D. 1500. Although the lower limit of the specified period is in accordance with the first appearance of iron working in the regions under discussion, the upper limit of 500B.P. is an arificial one. Tradional iron production in most areas here considered ended on in the colonial era. Attributes: Highly varied, often flat-based ceramics with generally rich decorations are characteristic. The most frequent ornamental techniques are rocking comb impression, incision, excision, stamping, applique, and rouletting. Lithinc implements include polished axes, hammer stones, grinding stones, and grooved and indented stones. Ornaments occur in the form of shell beads (Early Iron Age) or cylindrical ceramic beads (Late Iron Age). Diagnostic features include large settlement pits, shell middens, shaft-bowl iron-smelting furnaces, and pottery deposits in circular, deap pits (Inner Congo Basin). Engraved petroglyphs possibly dating from the Iron Age are found in areas with quartzite sandstones. The distinction between iron-using and iron-producing commuinties, although useful in some contexts, need not be made here because in Central Africa interpretations of evidence as belonging to the Iron Age almost exclusively rest on direct traces of the metallurgical process, that is, on the relics of furnaces, tuyeres, slags, and slag heap, whereas finished iron objects that could be indicative of exchange telation have not so far played a substantial role owing to preservation conditions. Follows the Central African Neolithic, precedes the historic period."								TOP	2.5		TOP of the Central African Neolithic								Central African Neolithic	4.9		"Follows and partly overlaps the microlithing late Stone Age in Gabon, the Congo, and Democratic Congo to the Tshitolian tradition. The Incipient Neolithic precedes the Iron Age tradition whereas the Neolithic proper is broadly coeval with the Iron Age.  West-Central Africa: Technology: Ground and polished axes, adzes or hoes of dolerite or schist, quartzite polishing stones, upper and lower grinding stones or quartzite or basalt, grooved stone, indented stones. Art and Pottery: Flat-based, richly ornamented ceramincs, often decorated with rocking comb impressions, zigzag incision, chevrons, herringbone patterns, festoons, punctates or appliqué. Vessel bases are frequently decorated, especially by rocked zigzag impression or incised motifs. Shapes include bilobed pots and vessels with angular sholders (vases carenes). These materials are characteristic of large and/or deep settlement pits. North-CentralAfrican: Megalithic monuments of rubble cairns with monolithic uprights and slab cists. Encyclopedia, p.46-58 (4,000/ 3,800 – 2,500)"																		Congo Basin Events	event	150	247/249/163	notitle	off						FAD												Tshitolian	14		"A tradition of core tools, especially core axes, along with small backed petit tranchet projectile points. Secondary diagnostic implements include picks and handaxes, some heavy scrapers, lanceolate and foliate points. Later Stone Age industry named after the Tshitolo Plateau in southern Zaire, the microlithic successor to the Lupemban and dated c 14,000-5000 BP.   Tshitolian: Word Chron (http://www.reference-wordsmith.com/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Tshitolian)"							LAD												Tshitolian	2		TOP of the Tshitolian																		East Africa	:	Main Culture Interval (E. Afr.)	_METACOLUMN_OFF																			Main Culture Interval (E. Afr.)	block	150	210/180/200	notitle								TOP	1.25		Top of East African Neolithic								East African Neolithic	5		"Several distinct ceramic traditions and Later Stone Age mircrolithic traditions. Associated with moderate to high proportions of cattle and caprines and moderate to high proportions of traded obsidian. Cairns and cremation burials sites have stone bowls, ochre-stained grindstones, and polished pestles. Settlements often resemble pastoralist homesteads. The period of prehistory when people began to use ground stone tools, cultivate plants, and domesticate livestock but before the use of metal for tools. Settlements often resemble modern pastoralist homesteads.  Follows the East African Microlithic and precedes the historic period"								East African Mircolith	20		"Mircolithic stone tools found in small campsites and settlements lacking rematins of domesticated animals. Use of the bow and arrow. Development of crude ceramics late in the tradition. Follows the Aterian tradion, precedes the East African Neolithic. "																		Zimbabwe	:	Main Culture Interval (Zimbabwe)	_METACOLUMN_OFF																			Main Culture Interval (Zimbabwe)	block	150	210/180/200	notitle								TOP	1.06		TOP of Nachikufan 								Nachikufan	16.715		"The abundant presence of backed microliths, in a variety of forms, is a significant criterion of the Nachikufan. Other flaked stone artefacts include an array of scraper types and other tools such as outis ecailles and drills. There are also a ground stone element, primarily bored stones and polished axes and adzes. Grindstones and mullers are present. Bone awls and points are fairly numerous, and shell beads occur. Mineral pigments are common, and rock art is found at some sites. Named after Nachikufu Cave.  7-8 millennia BC. Follows and particularly overlaps with the Southern and Eastern Africa Later Stone Age tradition, precedes the South African Iron Age tradition."																		South Africa	:	Southern Africa	Cape of Africa	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		Southern Africa	:	Main Culture Interval (S.Afr.)	South African Events								Main Culture Interval (S.Afr.)	block	150	210/180/200	notitle	off							TOP	0.5		Top of the South African Early Iron Age in Zambia								South African Early Iron Age in Zambia	2		"Presence of open-air sites as well as rock shelters. All the sites have physical evidence of one or more of the following: semipermanent structures, domesticated plants and/or animals, pottery, and metal artefacts and often evidence of iron smelting. "								Southern and Eastern Africa Later Stone Age	40		"Later Stone Age peopes used the bow and arrow as a primary hunting tool. Arrows were often armed with bone points, and bone tools are common throughout the Later Stone Age. The most common stone tools were scrapers, although a wide variety of stone tools were employed. During some periods of the Later Stone Age, microlithic industries dominated the stone tool assemblages, frequently made from single platform bladelet cores. The peoples of the Later Stone Age were the first in this region of Africa to make personal ornaments."								Southern and Eastern Africa Middle Stone Age	150		"The Middle Stone Age is characterised by the absence of handaxes and cleavers, which characterised the Achulean tradition, but also by the emergence of new flake and blade technology, which includes projectile points, scrapers, and denticulate tools. The Middle Stone Age is thought to be uniquely associated with modern  Homo sapiens. "																		South African Events	event	150	247/249/163		off						EVENT												Blombos Cave	7.5		First shell beads that bears human-made perforations and traces of use associated with a Still Bay assemblage. 																		Cape of Africa	:	Main Culture Interval (Cape)	Cape Events																			Main Culture Interval (Cape)	block	150	210/180/200	notitle								TOP	0										Cape Africa Iron Age	1.7										Wilton	10		"Coastal Wilton: Microlithic backed tools with segments, often made from siliceous rocks, whereas the Smithfield was characterised by an absence of backed tools and by the presences of large scrapers made from rocks such as hornfels. Interior Wilton: expediently manufactured, unretouched flake assemblages that may represent seasonal economic or social differences. Follows the Southern and Eastern Africa Late Stone Age tradition and precedes the south African Iron Age tradition. "																		Cape Events	event	150	247/249/163	notitle	off						FAD												Contact with Iron Age Farmers	1.7		Contact with Iron Age farmers in 1st millenium AD (see note on Wilton)																													Eastern Mediterranean	:	General Mediterranean	General Mediterranean events	Levant	Armenia	Israel	Anatolia	Greece	Crete	Italy												General Mediterranean	block	150	210/180/200									TOP	0										Independent States	0.17		Ottoman rule in Greece ends in 1830								Ottoman	0.547										Byzantine	1.688		"Byzantine culture: The eastern half of the Roman Empire, based in Byzantium (later Constantinople, now Istanbul), an ancient Greek settlement on the European side of the Bosporus. (AD 330 1453)(http://www.reference-wordsmith.com:80/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Byzantine)"								Roman	2.027		"Roman period: The period of Roman political and military control, generally between 200 BC and 400 AD, but varying for different regions, depending on the date of conquest. (Wordsmith)"								Hellenistic	2.323		Alexander the Great dies in 323 BC (Source = MET Timeline)								Iron Age	3.05		Technology age = MET Timeline (for Balkan)								Late Bronze Age	3.6		Greece and Technology ages = MET Timeline (for Balkan)								Middle Bronze Age	4		"A key diagnostic feature for the Middle Bronze Age (MBA) culture is the earliest use of true tin-bronze which was used to make distinctive weapons, tools and ornaments including: hafted flat axes, flat bladed  and veined daggers, stick pins with ""mushroom"" or ""club"" heads, garment fasteners and statuettes. Silver and gold were used to make ornamental goods and jewellery, as well as small figurines. Typical MBA ceramic forms include jugs, goblets, kraters, pithos, ""ring-base"" bowls, pot stands, and oil lamps. The so-called Tell el-Yehudiyeh Ware, named for the ""Hyskos"" site in the Egyptian Delta, includes small juglets with painted, incised, or ""punctate"" decoration, as well as ceramics in the form of fish, birds and humans. Pottery is usually wheel-made. Also typical of the MBA pottery assemblage is ""Leventine Painted Ware"". ""Monochrome Painted Cream Ware"" found primarily in the north, and was derived from a method linked to Amuq (Syrian) and SE Anatolia. Massive earthworks such as ramparts and glacis, as well as arched gateways made of mudbrick are also hallmarks of the MBA. The MBA is also marked by the first appearance of a local writing system (""ProtoCanaanite"")"								TOP	4		"Top of the Early Bronze Age (Early Canaanite Period, Proto-Canaanite, Proto-Urban)"								Early Bronze Age	5.5		"Early Canaanite Period, Proto-Canaanite, Proto-Urban.  The earliest phase of the EBA (Early Bronze Age) precedes the local appearance of bronze, which does not occur until later in the period. EBA remains are usually located in the basal layers of the major tells of Palestine, so broad horizontal exposures revealing architectural remains are limited. Information pertaining to the transition from the Chalcolithic Period to the EBA in the Levant are limited, yet there is strong evidence for some degree of continuity with the preceding Chalcolithic period.  The ceramics assemblage can be divided into cooking, storage, and serving wares, as well as separate groups of funerary wares. Common forms are storage jars, jugs, juglets, amphoriskoi, and “hole mouth” cooking pots and platters. Specific diagnostic features on pottery are the “wavy ledge handles” found mainly on jars, highly burnished red or purple-brown slip, and painted decoration particularly in the “line group” painted wares. The presence of Egyptian material, including the pottery and seal impression, is an important indicator of the EB1-2 in the south. It now seems clear that the Egyptian pottery (and the Egyptian presence) in the south ends in EBIb.  Diagnostic lithic types are few, but most notable are the “Canaanite blades”, though these occur in the Chalcolithic. Various metal weapons, especially the epsilon, or crescentic axeheads and elongated spearpoints, are also found in the EBA. "								Neolithic (Impressed Ware pottery)	6.85		Date = Encyclopedia plus 50; Source = Archeology dictionary (http://www.reference-wordsmith.com/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Impressed+Ware)								Neolithic (pre-pottery)	9										Mesolithic (Epipaleolithic)	10.3																				General Mediterranean events	event		210/180/200	notitle	off						FAD												Constantinople taken by Islam	0.547		Constantinople taken by Islam in 1453 AD								Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity	1.688		Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity in 312 AD; and declares Constantinople capital of Christian Empire in 330 AD (Source = WebChron) 								Augustus becomes emperor of Rome	2.027		Augustus becomes emperor of Rome in 27 BC (Source = WebChron)  								Middle Bronze II c	3.65										Middle Bronze II b 	3.8										EB4 (Early Bronze 4/ Intermediate Bronze/Middle Bronze Age 1)	4		"Follows the Early Bronze Age tradition and precedes the historic period. There is considerable debate regarding the Middle Bronze Age chronology, and therefore a lack of consensus on both dating and nomenclature for this period. The confusion stems in part from the fact that the Middle Bronze 1 is regarded by many scholars to belong to a seperate period all together, which combined with Early Bronze 4, constitutes what is now commonly referred to as the Intermediate Bronze Age. Much of the Middle Bronze Age chronology has been based on contemporary Egyptian and Mesopotamian texts, in addition to a limited number of clay tablets from sites in the southern Levant, which constitute the first written documentation concerning Canaan and its population. "								EB3 (Early Bronze 3)	4.65										EB2 (Early Bronze 2)	5.05										EB1 (Early Bronze 1)	5.5		"Follows the Chalcolithic tradition and precedes the Middle Bronze Age tradition. Critical to understanding both the relative and absolute chronology of the EBA are correlations between Levantine material and securely dated finds from Egypt. For instance, the reign of Djer, the third king of Dynasty 1 in Egypt, corresponds to the beginning of the EB2, the transition from EB2 to EB3 is linked to the end of the Second Dynasty in Egypt (ca. 4700 B.P.)"							LAD												Middle Bronze II c	3.55										Middle Bronze II b 	3.65										Middle Bronze II a 	3.8										EB3 (Early Bronze 3)	4.3		"The end of the EB3 marks a period of urban decline and social change so profound it is generally regarded as a separate period, the Intermediate Bronze Age.  "								EB2 (Early Bronze 2)	4.65										EB1 (Early Bronze 1)	5.05									EVENT												Alexander the Great dies	2.323																				Levant	:	Amuq Periods	Levant Periods	Levant other periods	Levant Events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																Amuq Periods	block	150	210/190/200	notitle		Data for this section came from The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago.						TOP	0.062										Amuq Phases P-V	2.55		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = During this period, the Amuq Valley again changed hands multiple times, from the Assyrians to the Babylonians, and eventually to the Persians, until they in turn were conuered by Alexander the Great. After the conquest of Alexander the Great in 333 A.D. the Selucids brought Helenistic culture to the Amuq Valley, and founded Antioch (modern Antakya). Antioch was a hub of trade, culture, and wealth in the region. Then during the Roman Period, it became pivotal in the development of Christianity, until the Arab Conquest in 700 A.D. which brought Islam to the Amuq Valley. It was an important site during the European Crusades, and was eventually taken over by the Ottoman Empire in 1516 A.D. Today it is a part of Turkey, and the society is largely agrarian and contains an ethnically diverse population, as it often has in the past. IMPORTANT SITES = Antakya RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Amuq Phases N-O	3.2		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = During this period, an independent kingdom sprang up in the Amuq Valley, after the fall of the Hittites and the beginning of a tumultuous period in the Mediterranean. Tell Tayinat was the capitol of this new kingdom, which showed a great deal of influence from the Hittite culture, making it a ""Neo-Hittite"" civilization. This Kingdom may have been known as Wadasatini. This kingdom eventually fell to the rulership of Assyria, who took tributes from the rulers of the Amuq Velley before eventually making it a part of their empire. IMPORTANT SITES = Tell Tayinat RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Amuq Phases K-M	4		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = During this period, the capitol of Amuq was at the site of modern Tell Atchana, which at the time was probably known as Alalakh, which was the capitol city of Mukish, an Amorite kingdom, and vassal to Yamkhad (Aleppo) during the Middle Bronze Age, before becoming a vassal of the Mittani, and then the Hittite empires. Alalakh was destroyed around 1200 B.C. when the Sea Peoples caused a great disturbance in the Mediterranean. Amuq traded with Mycanean Greece, Egypt, Cyprus, Mitanni, Assyria, Babylonia, the the Hittites. IMPORTANT SITES = Tell Atchana RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Amuq Phases H-J	4.75		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period is characterized by a change in architecture, as wel as the use of decorative hearths. The pottery of this period is characterized by the Red-Black Burnished Ware Pottery. Economy was still based on farming, however a large portion of the population was specialized in metallurgists, traders, and other crafts. Trade extended as far as Troy in Turkey and Ebla in Syria. IMPORTANT SITES = Tell Judaidah, Tell Tayinat, Tell Dahhab, Chatal Hoyuk RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Amuq Phases C-G	7.9		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = During this period, the farming villages of the Amuq Valley grew in size, until they became towns. Social and Econimic orgamization was more complex, as evidenced by stamp seals from the period. Artifacts from this time began to show contact with the Halaf, Ubaid, and Uruk cultures of Mesopotamia. Agriculture became more systematic, and produce began to be stored. IMPORTANT SITES = Tell Kurdu, Tell Tayinat, Tell Judaidah REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Amuq Phases A-B	8.8		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period begins what is known as the Amuq Sequence, which covers a series of periods in the Amuq Valley (known as the Plain of Antioch in ancient times) which is located on the Northeastern corner of the Mediterranean Sea. During this period, farmers began to settle the valley, raising cattle, sheep, goats, and pigs. The pottery of these levels (known as Dark-Faced Burnished Ware Pottery) is similar to that found in the early periods of the Anatoilian Plateau, Eastern Turkey, and the Levant. The people of the Amuq Valley traded with the Anatolians for obsidian. Metallurgy was decently sophisticated. IMPORTANT SITES = Tell Judaidah, Tell Dhahab REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"																		Levant Periods	block	150	210/190/200	notitle		"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	0										Independent States	0.052										Ottoman Empire	0.484		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The region remains important for international trade, with Baghdad remaining a center of religion and literature. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/otto1/hd_otto1.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ottomans before 1600</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Mamluk rule	0.709		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The slave soldiers of the Ayyubid sultans overthrew the last Ayyubid sultan in Egypt, al-Malik al-Ashraf, and established their own rule. Within a short period of time, the Mamluks controlled the greatest Islamic empire of the later Middle Ages. This included control of the Islamic holy cities, Mecca and Medina. The capital, Cairo, became the economic, cultral, and artistic center of the Islamic world. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/maml/hd_maml.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Mamluk Period (1250-1517)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Crusader Kingdom	0.901		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = In November 1095, Pope Urban II gave a sermon in France to launch the First Crusade. Beginning in June 1099, Crusaders held Jerusalem under siege until it fell in July 1099. After the fall of Jerusalem, the Crusaders took control of many cities on the Mediterranean coast and built fortifications to ortect their newly won lands. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/crus/hd_crus.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Crusades (1095-1291)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Caliphate rule	1.36		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Four followers of Muhammad spread the message of Islam after his death. They also lead Arab armies to conquer Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Iraq, and Iran. For more information, visit <a href="" http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/isla/hd_isla.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Birth of Islam</a>  RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Byzantine Empire	1.688		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The eastern half of the Roman Empire, based in Byzantium (later Constantinople, now Istanbul), an ancient Greek settlement on the European side of the Bosporus. (AD 330 1453). For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=byzantine""> Archaeology Wordsmith: The Byzantine Empire<a/> or <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/byza/hd_byza.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum: Byzantium (ca. 330-1453)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline/ Archaeology Dictionary"								Roman rule	1.936		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The period of Roman political and military control, generally between 200 BC and 400 AD, but varying for different regions, depending on the date of conquest. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Seleucid empire (Hellenistic rule)	2.331		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Overthrown by Alexander the Great in 332 BC. After his death in 323 B.C., his empire was divided among his generals. His friend  Seleucus Nicator became king over what is today Afgahnistan, Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon, as well as parts of Turkey, Armenia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikstan. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/sleu/hd_sleu.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Seleucid Empire (323-64 B.C.)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Persian rule	2.539		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This dynasty/Kingdom lasted from the time of Cyrus the Great in 550 B.C. to Darius III in 332 B.C, when it was taken over by Alexander the Great. For more information, visit <a href=""http://http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=Darius+III""> Archaeology Dictionary: Achaemenids</a>  RESOURCE = MET Timeline/ Archaeology Dictionary"								Assyrian then Babylonian rule	2.8		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Beginning in the ninth century B.C., Assyrian armies controlled this area and its major trade routes. This lasted until 609 B.C., when the last Assyrian king was defeated with his Egyptian allies by the Babylonian King Nabopolassar. Shortly after, Jerusalem falls under control of another Babylonian king: Nebuchadnezzar II. Much of the population is deported to Babylon, and the temple of Solomon is destroyed. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=04&region=wae#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum: The Eastern Mediterranean and Syria, 1000 B.C.-1 A.D.</a> or <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/assy/hd_assy.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum: Assyria, 1365-609 B.C.</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Aramaean (Jewish) kingdom	3		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Throughout northern and western Syria, Aramaean tribes form petty competing kingdoms. During this time, there is a slow transition from the use of copper to iron. For more information, visit <a href="" http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=03&region=wae#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum: The Eastern Mediterranean and Syria, 2000-1000 B.C.</a> or <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=04&region=wae#/Overview""> The Metropolitan Museum: The Eastern Mediterranian and Syria, 1000 B.C.-1 A.D.</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Villages appear in Levant highlands	3.2		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = At the end of the Bronze Age, the Egyptians pulled out of the Levant and villages began to appear in the Levant highlands. Some scholars believe these to be the first Israelites. In the Southern Levant, the Cannanites, who existed in the area all through the Bronze Age, began to rebuild their cities after the Egyptians left the area. At this time some of the Sea Peoples also settled in the area and became a group of people known as the Philistines. IMPORTANT SITES = Megiddo RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Egyptian Control of Megiddo	3.479		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = After the Egyptians expelled the Hyksos from their land, the pharaohs of the New Kingdom began a period of conquest. Pharaoh Thutmose III conquered Megiddo, a town cetrally located on their trade route to Assyria, in 1479 B.C. This period of control continued until the end of the Bronze Age, around 1200 B.C. IMPORTANT SITES = Megiddo RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Canaanite and Amorite dynasties	4		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Age Source (Greece, Crete) = Archeology dictionary.  Technology and Levant age = MET Timeline (for Balkan) "								TOP	5.5										Chalcolithic	6.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Some new Chalcolithic developments can be seen in the establishments of formal temples and burial grounds, the emergence of craft specialisation and metallurgy, a dramatic growth in the human population of the region, and the division of sites into spatial hierarchies with settlement centres that coordinate social, economic, and religious activities. These formative developments had direct bearing on the structure of Levantine societies in the following historic periods. In archaeological terms, this Protohistoric period, dating roughly 6500 – 5500 B.P. is called the Chalcolithic period. Follows the Ceramic Neolithic tradition and precedes the Early Bronze Age tradition. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/nahl/hd_nahl.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum: The Nahal Mishmar Treasure</a>. LOCATION = The Levant. The available evidence suggests that during the earlier half of the Holocene (around 10,000 – 5,000 B.P) conditions were wetter than the second half. In the Early Holocene, there may have been two wetter intervals (one around 9,000 – 7,000 B.P. and another at 5,500 B.P.) separated by a drier interval roughly between 7,000 – 5,500 B.P. This is shown primarily by oxygen isotopes from deep sea cores and the Dead Sea data. Thus, the second moist phase is centred around 5,500 B.P. and covers the very end of the Chalcolithic and the beginning of the Early Bronze Age.  Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 56"								Ceramic Neolithic (Late or Pottery Neolithic)	8		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Stone or mud-brick, mainly rectilinear architecture; lithic assemblages focused on flake production from pyramidal, multidirectional, or amorphous cores; rare and usually small symmetrical projectile points with notches, tangs, or both; domesticated sheep, goats, and cattle; clay animal and human figurines; wide repertoire of pottery, sometimes with dark burnished surface or geometric painted or incised decoration. Follows the Aceramic Neolithic tradition and is succeeded by the Chalcolithic tradition.  LOCATION = The Sinai, Levant, and the Euphrates and Tigris basins below the Taurus and Zagros mountains. IMPORTANT SITES = 'Ain Ghazal, Bouqras, Byblos, Hasuna, Jarmo, Jericho, Matarrah, Munhata, Sha'ar Hagolan, Tabaqat al-Bûma, Tell as-Sawwan, Umm Dabaghiyah, Wadi Rabah. Early in the Ceramic Neolithic, c. 7500 B.P., temperature and summer humidity may have dropped, making dry farming more difficult than in the Aceramic Neolithic. In general, the Ceramic Neolithic, experienced conditions somewhat more favourable than today, so that there were more perennial water sources, and woodlands were more extensive. At the same time, remnants of large Pleistocene lakes were shrinking in some areas.  Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 40"								Aceramic Neolithic (Pre-Pottery Neolithic)	10.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Stone or mud-brick architecture; lithic assemblages with high percentage of blade  or bladelet production; medium to large symmetrical projectile points; domesticated (in latter half) wheat, barley, peas, and lentils; managed  or domesticated goats; clay animal and human figurines; stone or plaster vessels, but pottery is rare.  The Aceramic Neolithic marks the beginning of village life in Southwest Asia. Aceramic Neolithic villages had many attributes of agricultural communities: large settlement size, substantial architecture long settlement duration, intensive  harvesting of seeds with sickles, equipment and facilities for storing and grinding seeds, and containers. Follows the Natufian tradition and is succeeded by the Ceramic Neolithic tradition.  LOCATION = The Levant, Syria, northern Iraq, southeastern Turkey IMPORTANT SITES = Abu Hureyra, 'Ain Ghazal, Basta, Beidha, Bouqras, Göbeckli Tepe, Jarmo, Jericho, Kfar ha-Horesh, Mureybet, Nahal Hemar, Nemrik 9, Netiv Hagdud, Qermez Dere, Tell Maghzaliyah The period began during the cold, dry Younger Dryas. About 10,000 B.P. , an increase in temperature and humidity left the lowlands frost-free in winter. Today, in most parts of Southwest Asia, seasonal precipitation is concentrated from November to April. There is some evidence that Holocene summers had rain, possibly because of a northerly route of monsoon winds. In general, the Aceramic Neolithic experienced relatively favourable conditions.  Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.1"								"Epipaleolithic (Upper Palaeolithic, Kebaran, Geometric Kebaran)"	45		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Small, open air campsites of mobile groups of hunter-gatherers, with occasional stratified rock shelters and cave sites, almost all of the latter of which are located in the Mediterranean zone. Occupations commonly contain hearths; other features include rare, lightly constructed shelters and pits. Blade, bladelet, and flake chipped stone tools are the main material remains, including points, scrapers, burins, and microliths. There are sometimes accompanied by bone tools, ochre, and shell bead ornaments. Grinding and pounding equipment on limestone and basalt first appear during the Upper Palaeolithic, and increase in quantity and diversity during the course of the Epipaleolithic. Follows the Middle Palaeolithic tradition, overlaps with the Natufian tradition in Levant, and precedes the Aceramic Neolithic tradition.  LOCATION = The Levant and Mesopotamia. IMPORTANT SITES = Abu Hureyra, Abu Noshra, Avdat area (Boqer Tachtit, Boqer, Ein Aqev, Ein Aqev East, Rosh Zin); Ein Gev, El-Kowm (Nadaouiyeh, Umm el Tlel), El-Wad, Eyan (Mallaha), Gebel Maghara (Mushabi, Lagama), Har Harif (Rosh Horesha, Saflulim, Abu Salem, Ramat Harif), Hayonim Cave and Terrace, Kebara Cave, Ksar Akil, Lower Jordan Valley (Fazael, Urkan e-Rubb, Salibiya), Nahal Hadera (Hefziba), Nahal Oren, Neve David, Ohalo II, Qadesh Barnea, Tor Hamar, Wadi Hammeh, Wadi Hasa (Ain Buhira, Thalab al-Buhira, Tor Sadif, Tor al-Tareeq, Ucagizli, Yutil el-Hasa), Wadi Jilat/Azaq (Jilat 6, Uwaynid, Kharaneh IV), Western Negev Dunes (Azariq, Nizzana, Nahal Lavan, Shunera, Nahal Sekher), Yabrud II-III, Zarzi. The Epipaleolithic tradition extends across a period of dramatic climatic change. The tradition begins during the last glacial maximum when the Levant and Mesopotamia were much cooler and drier than today. Over time the climate ameliorated, and by ca. 12,000 B.P., a significant warming trend led to almost ideal conditions for human habitation. By ca. 10,800 B.P., the cooler and drier conditions of the Younger Dryas tool hold of the region, creating the diverse mosaic of environments and microenvironments we see today. Rainfall today varies from over 1000mm to less than 50mm annually, and is generally limited to winter months. Summer across the region are relatively hot and dry.  Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 122 – 123 "																		Levant other periods	block	150	210/190/200	notitle	off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	6.2										Ubaid culture	7		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This culture began in southern Mesopotamia, and then spread to the rest of Mesopotamia. It is well known for its pottery, which is somewhat different from that of the Halaf culture. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/ubai/hd_ubai.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum: The Ubaid Period (5500-4000 B.C.)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Halaf culture	8.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = A farming society in northern Mesopotamia that is well known for their distinctive and hgih quality ceramics. This culture was eventually absorbed into the Ubaid culture. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/half/hd_half.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum: The Halaf Period (6500-5500 B.C.)</a>. IMPORTANT SITES = Arpachiyah, Sabi Abyad, and Yarim Tepe RESOURCE = MET Timeline"																		Levant Events	event		210/190/200	notitle	off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."					FAD												Jerusalem taken by Crusaders	0.901		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = In November 1095, Pope Urban II gave a sermon in France to launch the First Crusade. Beginning in June 1099, Crusaders held Jerusalem under siege until it fell in July 1099. After the fall of Jerusalem, the Crusaders took control of many cities on the Mediterranean coast and built fortifications to ortect their newly won lands. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/crus/hd_crus.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Crusades (1095-1291)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity	1.688		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The eastern half of the Roman Empire, based in Byzantium (later Constantinople, now Istanbul), an ancient Greek settlement on the European side of the Bosporus. (AD 330 1453). For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=byzantine""> Archaeology Wordsmith: The Byzantine Empire<a/> or <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/byza/hd_byza.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum: Byzantium (ca. 330-1453)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline/ Archaeology Dictionary"								Egypt Conquers Megiddo	3.479		"EVENT CHARACTERISTICS = Pharaoh Thutmose III (of the New Kingdom) conquered Megiddo in 1479 B.C., beginning a period of control which lasted until the end of the Bronze Age around 1200 B.C. RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Alishar	7		EVENT DESCRIPTION = The beginnings of a small farming village located in the fertile valley along a major trade route. Later grew in size and became a part of the Hittite empire. REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago							LAD												Acre retaken by Islam	0.709		Acre retaken by Islam in 1291 = end of Latin Crusader kingdom (which had shrank since 1187) (Source = MET Timeline)								Alishar Becomes Part of the Hittite Kingdom	3.65		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Close in location to the Hittite capitol of Hattusha, Alishar was part of the core of the Hittite Empire. It was an important hub of trade between the Hittites and the Assyrians. Records found in Assyria and Hattusha indicate that at the time it may have been known as Ankuwa. REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"							EVENT												Israel independence	0.052		Independence of Israel in 1948 creates a new political arena								Alishar Grows in Size	4.5		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Around this time in the Bronze age, the people of Alishar likely spoke the indigenous Hittite language, and had mingled with Hittites, who spoke Indo-European. This town, because of its location along a major trade route, had many contacts around the Mediterranean. REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"																		Armenia	:	Armenia Periods	Armenia Events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		Armenia Periods	block	150	210/190/200	notitle								TOP	1.358		Sasanian rule overthrown by the Muslim Arabs in 642 AD.								Sasanian rule	1.776		0																													Armenia Events	event		210/190/200	notitle	off						LAD												Muslim Arabs overthrow Sasanian rule	1.358		Sasanian rule overthrown by the Muslim Arabs in 642 AD.							EVENT												battle of Arvarayr	1.549		"The Armenians lost the battle, but succeeded in resisting the Persians in their attempts to convert the country to the Zoroastrian faith."								Sasanians partition Armenia	1.613		"Under an agreement with Constantinople, the Sasanians partitioned Armenia in 387 AD."								Armenia adopts Christianity as state religion	1.699		Armenia adopted Christianity around 301 AD. This means that it is the longest surviving Christian nation in modern times.								Nero crowns Trdat king of Armenia	1.934		"Trdat (Tiridates I) founded the Armenian Arsacids dynastym which lasted until its last representative, Artaxis IV was deposed in 428 AD."								Rome overthrows the rule of Tigranes II the Great	2.069		"Between 69 and 66 BC, Roman generals Lucullus and Pompey overthrew the rule of Tigranes II the Great, although he still maintained control over eastern Armenia."								Tigranes II The Great of Armenia	2.095		"During his rule Armenia rose to a world power. He married the daughter of Mithradates Eupator of Pontus, who himself was a known enemy of the Romans. He was suceeded by his son Artavazd II, who was kidnapped and killed by Antony and Cleopatra in 34 BC."								Armenian Dynasty of the Orontids	2.331		Ruled independantly after the conquest of Persia by Alexander the Great								Collapse of Urartu	2.6		"Urartu collapsed under pressure from invading Cimmerians, Scythians, and the Iranian Medes."								Sargon II invades Urartu.	2.714		Marked the beginning of Urartu's decline.								King Aramu begins his reign over Urartu.	2.88		"King Aramu was the first known king of Urartu as a disticnt political entity. In the following century, Urartu became the largest kingdom in Western Asia, its borders stretching north to Colchis and the land of the Georgians, and to Syria in the west."																		Israel	:	Israel Periods	Israel Events	 _METACOLUMN_OFF																		Israel Periods	block	150	210/190/200	notitle								TOP	2.6										Assyrian control of Megiddo	2.732		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Assyrians conquered Megiddo in 732 BC, eventually making it a local capital in their expanding empire. IMPORTANT SITES = Megiddo RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Isrealite control of southern Levant	2.975		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = After two groups (city dwellers who moved to the southern highlands of the levant, and pastoral nomads already living there) blended and formed an dentity as the Israelites begnning around 1200 BC, they eventually formed a dominant political force in the area around 975 BC. IMPORTANT SITES = Megiddo RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Villages appear in Levant highlands	3.2		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = At the end of the Bronze Age, the Egyptians (and other cultures, such as Mycenae and Anatolia) suffered a collapse. As a result, Egypt pulled out of the Levant and villages began to appear in the highlands of southern Levant. Some scholars believe these to be the first Israelites. In southern Levant, the Cannanites, who existed in the area all through the Bronze Age, began to rebuild their cities after the Egyptians left the area. At this time some of the Sea Peoples also settled in the area and became a group of people known as the Philistines. IMPORTANT SITES = Megiddo RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Egyptian Control of Megiddo	3.479		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = After the Egyptians expelled the Hyksos from their land, the pharaohs of the New Kingdom began a period of conquest. Pharaoh Thutmose III conquered Megiddo, a town centrally located on their trade route to Assyria, in 1479 B.C. This period of control continued until the end of the Bronze Age, around 1200 B.C. IMPORTANT SITES = Megiddo RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Megiddo shows evidence of interntionalism	3.55		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Megiddo was a large city in southern Levant (around modern Israel and Jordan). In ancient times it was part of the trail leading from Egypt to Syria. So many battles and wars were fought there, that it is recorded in the bible as the place where the battle of Armageddon will occur (Armgeddon deriving from the Hebrew ""Har Megiddo"", meaning Mount of Megiddo). From 1550 to 1200 BC, the artifacts from Meggido show many different styles, showing international influence from places such as Egypt, Cyprus, Mitanni, and Mycenae. RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"																		Israel Events	event		210/190/200	notitle							FAD												Egypt Conquers Megiddo	3.479		"EVENT CHARACTERISTICS = Pharaoh Thutmose III (of the New Kingdom) conquered Megiddo in 1479 B.C., beginning a period of control which lasted until the end of the Bronze Age around 1200 B.C. RESOURCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"							EVENT												Israel independence	0.052		EVENT CHARACTERISTICS = Independence of Israel in 1948 creates a new political arena 																		Anatolia	:	Anatolia Periods	Anatolia Events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		Anatolia Periods	block	150	210/190/200	notitle								TOP	0										Republic	0.077										Ottoman Empire	0.547										Byzantine & Sultinate	0.919		Byzantine culture in West; Seljuq sultinate in East								Byzantine Empire	1.688		"Byzantine culture: The eastern half of the Roman Empire, based in Byzantium (later Constantinople, now Istanbul), an ancient Greek settlement on the European side of the Bosporus. (AD 330 1453)(http://www.reference-wordsmith.com:80/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Byzantine)"								Roman rule	2.064		"The period of Roman political and military control, generally between 200 BC and 400 AD, but varying for different regions, depending on the date of conquest. (Wordsmith)"								Seleucid empire (Hellenistic rule)	2.331										Achaemenid (Persian) rule	2.539										Lydian kingdom	2.7										Phrygian kingdom	2.8										Hittite kingdoms	3.68										TOP	4.2		Top of Kura-Araxes culture.								Kura-Araxes culture	5.5										TOP	6.2		Top of Ubaid Culture.								Ubaid culture	7										TOP	7		Top of the Halafian								Halafian	7.7		"Architectural features include tholoi, buildings with circular rooms and rectangular anterooms. Tauf construction, stone foundations. Very well made and richly decorated painted pottery, handmade. Anthropomorphic figurines, stone stamp seals, obsidian tools, clay sling bullets. Overlaps with the end of Hassuna/Samarra tradition and start of Ubaid tradition. "								Aceramic Neolithic (Pre-Pottery Neolithic)	10.5		"Stone or mud-brick architecture; lithic tools with high percentage of blade  or bladelet production; medium to large symmetrical projectile points; domesticated (in latter half) wheat, barley, peas, and lentils; managed  or domesticated goats; clay animal and human figurines; stone or plaster vessels, but pottery is rare.  The Aceramic Neolithic marks the beginning of village life in Southwest Asia. Aceramic Neolithic villages had many attributes of agricultural communities: large settlement size, substantial architecture long settlement duration, intensive  harvesting of seeds with sickles, equipment and facilities for storing and grinding seeds, and containers. Follows the Natufian tradition and is succeeded by the Ceramic Neolithic tradition. "																		Anatolia Events	event		210/190/200	notitle	off						FAD												Republic of Turkey founded	0.077		Mideast divided 1918. Republic of Turkey founded 1923 (MET Timeline)								Seljuq sultinate	0.919		Seljuq sultinate of Anatolia established 1081 AD (until 1307 AD; when Ottomans acquired it); with Byzantine continuing in West. 							EVENT												Constantinople taken by Islam	0.547		Constantinople taken by Islam in 1453 AD								Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity	1.688		Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity in 312 AD; and declares Constantinople capital of Christian Empire in 330 AD (Source = WebChron) 																		Greece	block	150	210/190/200			"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	0										Independent	0.17		INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Ottoman rule in Greece ends in 1830 RESOURCE = MET Timeline								Ottoman Empire	0.547		INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Constantinople taken by Islam in 1453 AD RESOURCE = MET Timeline								Byzantine Empire	1.688		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity in 312 AD; and declares Constantinople capital of Christian Empire in 330 AD Byzantine culture: The eastern half of the Roman Empire, based in Byzantium (later Constantinople, now Istanbul), an ancient Greek settlement on the European side of the Bosporus. (AD 330 1453) RESOURCE = Archaeology Dictionary/ WebChron"								Roman rule	2.146		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Romans sack Corinth, beginning the Roman Rule in Greece. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/romr/hd_romr.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Roman Republic</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Hellenistic period	2.323		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Alexander the Great dies in 323 BC, beginning the Helenistic Period in Greece. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/haht/hd_haht.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Art of the Hellenistic Age and the Hellenistic Tradition</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Classical period	2.477		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Delian League formed 477 B.C., after the end of Persian Wars. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/tacg/hd_tacg.htm'> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of Classical Greece (ca. 480-323)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Archaic period	2.75		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Greeks began to sail overseas and establish colonies in Italy and Sicily. Tradition holds that Homer wrote the Illiad and the Odyssey at this time. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/argk/hd_argk.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Greek Art in the Archaic Period</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Geometric period	2.9		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = At this time, Greece began forming the institutions for which it is best known today. This was the rise of the city-state, state religion, and the Greek alphabet. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/grge/hd_grge.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum: Geometric Art in Ancient Greece</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Greek Dark Ages	3.15		INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The end of the Mycanaean Period brought on the beginning of the Greek Dark Ages. RESOURCE = MET Timeline/ WebChron								Mycenaean Period	3.6		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Then name of the culture of this time period comes from the site of Mycenae. This was an era of prosperity on the Greek mainland. The Mycenaeans traded throughout the Mediterranean, and built a great number of bridges, tombs, and irrigation systems. They wrote using an alphabet known as Linear B. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/myce/hd_myce.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Mycenaean Civilization</a>. Mycenae, in the Peloponnese RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Middle Helladic culture	4										Early Helladic culture (Early Bronze age)	5										Neolithic	9										Mesolithic	10.3																				Crete	:	Crete Periods	Crete Events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		Crete Periods	block	150	210/190/200	notitle								TOP	3.15										Minoan (Crete) - Postpalatial	3.375		1100 BC end of Mycenaean culture (and on Crete)  according to MET Timeline; but 1150 BC on WebChron (used here)								Minoan (Crete) - Neopalatial	3.7										Minoan (Crete) - Protopalatial	4		Crete and Knossos palaces came under Mycenean rule. Age and definition 								Minoan (Crete) - Prepalatial	5										Neolithic (Impressed Ware pottery)	6.85																				Crete Events	event		210/190/200	notitle	off						EVENT												Santorini (Thera) erupted	3.45		Santorini (Thera) erupted in 1450 BC 																		Italy	block	150	210/190/200									TOP	0										Unified nation	0.139		Main re-unification of Italy in 1861 (MET Timeline)								Papal and city states	1.244		Papal states lasted 756-1870 AD (Source = MET Timeline)								Lombard kingdom	1.448		"Split of Italy, with Lombard being largest ruling group (approx. age from MET Timeline)"								Kingdom of Ostrogoths	1.524		Last Roman emperor in West (Romulus Augustulus) is deposed in 476 AD (Source = WebChron)								Western Roman Empire	1.688		"Emperor Constantine converts to Christianity in 312 AD; and declares Constantinople capital of Christian Empire in 330 AD (Source = WebChron) Byzantine culture: The eastern half of the Roman Empire, based in Byzantium (later Constantinople, now Istanbul), an ancient Greek settlement on the European side of the Bosporus. (AD 330 1453)(http://www.reference-wordsmith.com:80/cgi-bin/lookup.cgi?category=&where=headword&terms=Byzantine)"								Roman Empire	2.027		"Augustus becomes emperor of Rome in 27 BC (Source = WebChron)  Roman period: The period of Roman political and military control, generally between 200 BC and 400 AD, but varying for different regions, depending on the date of conquest. (Wordsmith)"								Roman Republic	2.509		Etruscan rule of Rome ends in 509 BC 								Early Rome	2.753		Rome founded 753 BC.  								Copper and Bronze Age	5										Neolithic	7										Mesolithic	11																															Middle East to India	:	Generalized Middle Asia intervals	Mesopotamia	Persia (Iran)	Arabia	India and South Asia	_METACOLUMN_OFF															Generalized Middle Asia intervals	block	150	230/207/234		off							TOP	0										Islamic	1.339										Iron Age	3.2										Late Bronze Age	3.6										Middle Bronze Age	4										Early Bronze Age	5.1										Late Chalcolithic Mesopotamia	5.8										Calcolithic (Copper Age)	7										Ceramic Neolithic	8										Pre-Pottery Neolithic	11.5										Beginnings of Agriculture 	12										Late Paleolithic	40																				Mesopotamia	:	Mesopotamia Periods	Mesopotamia Lesser-Periods	Mesopotamia Events	Mesopotamia Secondary Events																	Mesopotamia Periods	block	150	230/217/234	notitle		"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ as well as the Archaeology Dictionary, which can be found at http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/info.php, and The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, edited by Arthur Cotterell."						TOP	0										Islamic rule	1.364		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Four followers of Muhammad spread the message of Islam after his death. For more information, visit <a href="" http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/isla/hd_isla.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Birth of Islam</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Sasanian rule	1.776		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Ardashir I was a descendant of Sasan, who defeated the Parthians and founded the Sasanian dynasty. During this time, the central government became stronger, and Zoroastrianism was made the state religion. The Sasanian Empire was situated between China and the Romano-Byzantine Empires, all three of which were linked by the silk road. The Sasanian empire took advantage of being in the center of this large trade route, and grew wealthy. Administration was strong enough to sponsor state run hospitals, schools, colleges, irrigation projects, and careful city planning. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/sass/hd_sass.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Sasanian Empire (224-651 A.D.)</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Parthian rule	2.138		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Founded by a seminomadic people called the Parni, from a place called Parthava, who invaded the Seleucid satrapy of Parthia, led by their leader Arsaces. After this successful conquest they were known as the Parthians. Their empire equalled Rome in wealth, and lasted for almost 400 years. Their capitol was just south of modern Baghdad, called Ctesiphon. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/part/hd_part.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Parthian Empire (247 B.C.-224 A.D.)</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Hellenistic rule	2.332		REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary								Persian rule	2.55		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This dynasty/Kingdom lasted from the time of Cyrus the Great in 550 B.C. to Darius III in 332 B.C, when it was taken over by Alexander the Great. For more information, visit <a href=""http://http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=Darius+III""> Archaeology Dictionary: Achaemenids</a>  REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary"								Assyrian / Babylonian period	4		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period is generally regarded as the classical period in babylonian history, especially the Hammurapi era. The culture was a mix of earlier influences, the most important being those of Sumer and Akkad. The spoken language was a dialect of Akkadian, however the written language was a script from Sumer. In Assyria there were 3 fairly autonomous city states: Nineveh, Ashur, and Arbela. Not much is known about Nineveh and Arbela during this period, however we know that Ashur was ruled by a series of vice regents who engaged in many building projects over the centuries, such as temples, palaces, and walls. They also participated in a profitable copper trade with Anatolia. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 78, 90-92, 101-102"								TOP	4.17										Akkadian	4.35		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = ""The Akkadian Empire was the first ancient Semitic empire of Mesopotamia, centered in the city of Akkad. The Akkadian period is generally dated to 2350–2170 BC according to the Middle Chronology, which fixes the reign of Hammurabi to 1792–1750 BCE and the sack of Babylon to 1595 BCE."" Period specific characteristics appear in almost all cultural areas, including pottery and alphabet styles. Cuniform gradually replaced Sumerian, and was used for the Akkadian language. Akkadian imperial standard metrology (length,land, capacity, weight), was utilized throughout the Empire, and was even expressed in standard mudbrick and ration bowl sizes. Akkadian follows the Early Dynastic period and precedes the Ur III period. The periodization of the Empire over time reflects its politicoeconomic development: 1.)early Akkadian, the period of Sargon and his first two dynastic successors who conducted long-distance raiding; 2.) the reigns of Naram-Sin and Shar-kali-sharri, who built imperial regional fortresses and administrative centres; and 3.) the period of “confusion,” minor rulers, and collapse. . LOCATION: The empire controlled both irrigation agriculture in northern Mesopotamia (Sumer) and rain-fed agriculture in northern Mesopotamia (Subir). The latter extended from Zagros piedmont on the east to the westernmost drainage of the Habur River, midway to the Balikh River. The Akkadian capital, Akkade, remains unlocated. Important sites: Brak, Leilan, Nineveh, Nuzi, Sus, Ur, among others. . REFERENCE = REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 21"								Sumerian	4.9		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Early Dynastic Period Mesopotamia (Sumerian)/ Ninevite V Period = This period shows marked urbanization, with most of the population living in walled cities which each functioned as a political unit, having their own rulers and patron deities. This period is also characterized by cuneiform writing and plain, wheel-made ceramics with conical bowls. Follows the Jamdat Nasr tradition and precedes the Akkadian tradition. The early Dynastic tradition is typically divided into three major phases: Early Dynastic I, in which the main features of the tradition are established; a transitional period called Early Dynastic II; and Early Dynastic III, in which written records become common and the Sumerian empire becomes well established. The tradition ends with the conquest of Sumer by Sargon of Agade.. LOCATION = The lower Tigris, Euphrates, and Diyala river valles in what is today Iraq. IMPORTANT SITES = Abu Salabikh, al-Ubaid, Girsu (Tello), Lagash (al-Hiba), Nippur, Tell Asmar, Tell Agrab, Ur (Tell al-Muqayyar, Uruk  (Warka).. ENVIRONMENT = Climatic conditions in the Early Dynastic tradition were similar to those today. Winters were mild, while summers were hot and dry. Mean annual temperature was between 20 – 25°C, and mean annual rainfall is only about 200mm. These conditions were stable to about 2300 B.C., when an abrupt climate change, noted in globally distributed lake, marine, and speleotherm cores, reduced precipitation to c. 20 – 30% from today's levels. The threefold dust spike that accompanied this abrupt climate change was not reduced to Holocene background levels until ca. 1900 B.C. The abrupt change was synchronous with 1.) the Akkadian imperial collapse, as well as the collapse of sedentary systems in Anatolia, Palestine, Greece and the Aegean, and Egypt. 2.) Amorite pastoral nomad movements that challenged state political authorities, as did “The Sandcrossers” in Egypt.  . REFERENCE = REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 112/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Uruk period	6		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Late Chalcolithic (Uruk period) = In the larger region, there are a number of diagnostic types of pottery, seal design, and architecture associated with subregional areas. “Late Chalcolithic” usually refers to local cultural material in the steppes and foothills of northern and eastern Mesopotamia, as opposed to the “Uruk”, which refers to the material diagnostic of the southern alluvium of modern Iraq and southwestern Iran (Susiana). In the Late Chalcolithic material, there are further subdivisions into the eastern piedmont of Iraq, the steppes of Syria and Iraq, the western plains of Syria and the Hatay in Turkey (Amuq F), the foothills of the Taurus mountains in Turkey, and the foothills of the Zagros mountains in western Iran. This period begins in the Terminal Ubaid Period and ends with the earliest Early Bronze Age. The latter is known also as the Kurban V, Jemdet Nasr, Proto-Elamite, or the earliest Ninevite V period. It therefore fits in the Chalcolithic post-Neolithic period, whose earlier phases are the Halaf and Ubaid periods.REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 261 – 262. LOCATION = This period is notable in the basins of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers of the Middle East and their tributaries. Geographically, it covere the modern countries of Iraq, western Iran, Syria (all but the Levantine coast), and southeastern Turkey. IMPORTANT SITES = South: Ur, Uruk, Girsu, Eridu, Nippur, Abu Salabikh, Susa, Choga Mish, Farakhabad, Sharafabad. Piedmont and Zagros hills: Eshnunna, Rubeideh, Godin Tepe, Nuzi (Yorgan Tepe), Qalinj Agha, Tepe Giyan, Sialk, Geoy Tepe, Tepe Gawra, Nivevah, Mohammad Arab. Jazira and Habur plains: Teluh eth Thalathat, Tell al-Hawa, Hamoukar, Leilan, Grai Resh, Tell Azzo, Tell Brak. Middle-Upper Euphrates plains: Qraya, Hammam et Turkman, Hadid, Umm Qseir, Sheikh Hassan, Jebel Aruda, El Kowm, Habuba Kabira, Carchemish, Jerablus Tahtai, Tell 'Abir, Tilbes Hoyuk, Kurban Hoyuk, Samsat, Kazane. Taurus Hills: Arslantepe, Tepecik, Norsuntepe. Amuq and adjoining plains: Judeideh, Sakce Gozu, Karatut Merkii.. ENVIRONMENT = In the southern alluvium, temperatures in mid-afternoon vary from approximately 17-22C in November through early March to 34-35C  from late March to October. The climate of the region is semiarid to arid. The alluvial plains, steppes and piedmont are part of the desertic Saharo-Sindian vegetation zone: the Zagros and Taurus foothills fall in the continental Irano-Turanian zone. Rainfall in the winter growing season is at a bare minimum for rainfall agriculture. Most agriculture and water use depend on the rivers, whose flood is determined by snowfall in the Taurus and Zagros mountains. The flow rates vary from destructive flooding in some years to drought in others. In the northern plains and foothills, the range of temperatures is similar to that of the southern alluvium. Rainfall agriculture is possible throughout the northern steppes and foothills. . REFERENCE = REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 261 – 262"								Ubaid 	7.1		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Hard-filed ceramic vessels consisting of buff or red paste and decorated with geometric designs in black or red paint. Other distinctive objects include bent-clay nails, clay sickles, and reptilian headed figurines. Architectural features include temples and tripartite structures in which large, frequently T-shaped hall is flanked by a series of rooms on each side. Follows the Aceramic Neolithic tradition and precedes the Late Chalcolithic Mesopotamia tradition. In Mesopotamia, the Ubaid represents the earliest known culture. In central Mesopotamia and Khuzistan, it follows the Samarran period and precedes the Uruk period. In northern Mesopotamia, it follows the Halaf period, which it replaces. It precedes the late Chalcolithic period, represented by Tepe Gawra, which is closesly related to the Uruk tradition of southern Mesopotamia.  [Ubaid divisions made equal within Ubaid interval for now.]. LOCATION = Iraq and western Iran, in what are referred to as Mesopotamia and Khuzistan, respectively. The earliest known sites extend from southern Mesopotamia and Khuzistan to as far north as the Hamrin basin in east-central Iraq. IMPORTANT SITES = Tell el-'Oueili. ENVIRONMENT = The Ubaid period was characterised by major climatic changes. During the beginning of this period, summers would have been somewhat hotter than today. Winter temperatures would have been colder. The beginning of the Ubaid tradition was also marked by a wet monsoonal climatic regime, with rainfall beginning earlier in the fall and ending later in the spring. By the end of the Ubaid tradition, climatic conditions were well on their way toward modern values, with perhaps slightly higher annual temperatures and greater aridity at the end of the Ubaid than today. In northern Mesopotamia, annual seasonality appears to have been extreme. Summer were intensely arid. During the winter, violent rainstorms resulted in erosion of dry soils, incision of wadis, and possible destruction of settlements.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 372 - 373/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Halafian	8.1		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = ""The Halaf culture is a prehistoric period which lasted between about 6100 and 5100 BCE"" (Wikipedia entry).  Architectural features include tholoi, buildings with circular rooms and rectangular anterooms. They were made with Tauf construction (using compressed mud) , and stone foundations. At Arpachiyah, it seems likely that the tholoi were domed, and over time they grew in size so that the most recent had central chambers 10 meters across. The Halafian is also known for very well made and richly decorated painted pottery, which was handmade. Anthropomorphic figurines, stone stamp seals, obsidian tools, and clay sling bullets have also been found. This period overlaps with the end of Hassuna/Samarra tradition and start of Ubaid tradition. According to the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, this period dates from 5600 to 5000 B.C.. LOCATION = Core Halafian area is rolling hilly and arable country in a broad band of territory across northern Mesopotamia, from Hamrin region of central-east Iraq through northern Iraq, across northern Syria, and into southern Anatolia, closely following the modern 250mm isohyet. Important sites: Arpachiyah, Girikihaciayan, Tell Hassan, Tell Sabi Abyad, Umm Qseir, Yarim Tepe.. ENVIRONMENT = There is evidence for a period of aridification immediately before the Halafian period, which may help explain the lack of continuity in settlement patterns from Hassuna/Samarra to Halafian. Otherwise, temperatures and rainfall are believed to have been similar to those of today, with average rainfall of 250mm through the core Halafian region, average winter temperatures around 5°F, and average summer temperatures of 80 – 90°F. REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 138 Top at 7000 B.P./ Beginning age taken from MET Timeline/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Samarra and Hassuna cultures	8.2		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Named for the site of Hassuna where a particular type of potery was first identified. The pottery is decorated with incised lines and is lightly fired. The site of Hassuna was originally occupied by campsites before structures were built. Houses were made of pressed mud, and were rectangular, with smaller room surrounding a courtyard. Graves are often of children or adolescents who were buired under the floors of houses. Pottery found at the site of Samarra is characterized by elaborate geometric designs in many colors. Samarran houses were very regular in shape and size, and after demolition, new houses were built in the same location as the old houses, which may be an indication of land ownership. The Samarran economy was based in agriculture, and there is evidence they used irrigation. Burials are common, and many contain grave goods. The Hassuna culture lasted from 6200-5700 B.C. and the Samarra culture lasted from 6100-5500 B.C. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=02&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Mesopotamia, 8000-2000 B.C.</a> . IMPORTANT SITES: Samarra, Hassuna. REFERENCE = MET timeline/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								TOP	9.5										Natufian	12.5	dashed	"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Natufian (Late Epipaleolithic) = ""The Natufian culture is the name given to the sedentary hunter-gatherers living in the Levant region of the near east between about 12,500 and 9500 years ago.  The term ""Natufian"" was coined by Dorothy Garrod who studied the Shuqba cave in Wadi an-Natuf, in the western Judean Mountains. "" (wikipedia entry).  During this period sedentary hamlets are located near stands of wild cereals and nut-bearing trees in the Mediterranean zone. This period is characterized by ground stone implements such as mortars and pestles for processing cereals and nuts and sickle blades for harvesting cereals. The dead were buried in formal cemetaries. Many utensils of this time were decorated. In the more marginal desert zone, more mobile adaptations are typical. This period follows the Epipaleolithic tradition and precedes the Aceramic Neolithic tradition. . Location: The Levant Important sites: Abu Salem, Ain Mallaha (Eynan), Beidha, el-Wad, Erq el-Ahmar, Hayonim Cave and Terrace, Nahal Oren, Ramat Harif (G8), Rosh Zin, Rosh Horesha, Saiide II, Upper Besor 6, Tell Abu Hureyra, Wadi Hammeh 27.. ENVIRONMENT = The beginning of the Natufian tradition corresponds to the peak of significant climatic amelioration at the end of the last glacial maximum. The Natufian period is marked by a time of steadily rising precipitation and termperatures, lasting through to about 10,800 B.P. and followed by an abrupt deterioration of the climate corresponding to the Younger Dryas event. Temperatures changes brought about with them changes in plant communities. The range of cereals like wheat and barley, trees such as oak, almond and pistachio expanded significantly. Grassland animal species such as gazelle also expanded, both in range and population. The principal physical changes to the Levant involved the swift rise in sea level, which inundated large portions of the Mediterranean coastal plain,  and the retreat of the Lake Lisan (which became the modern Sea of Gililee and the Dead Sea), which facilitated human and animal movement across the central and lower Jordan Valley.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, P. 306 - 307/ Date taken from The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								"Epipaleolithic (Kebaran,etc.)"	45	dashed	"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Epipaleolithic (Upper Palaeolithic, Kebaran, Geometric Kebaran) cultures = Small, open air campsites of mobile groups of hunter-gatherers, with occasional stratified rock shelters and cave sites. Occupations commonly contain hearths; other features include rare, lightly constructed shelters and pits. Blade, bladelet, and flake chipped stone assemblages are the main material remains, including points, scrapers, burins, and microliths. These are sometimes accompanied by bone tools, ochre, and shell bead ornaments. Grinding and pounding equipment on limestone and basalt first appear during the Upper Palaeolithic, and increase in quantity and diversity during the course of the Epipaleolithic. Follows the Middle Palaeolithic tradition, overlaps with the Natufian tradition in Levant, and precedes the Aceramic Neolithic tradition.. Location: The Levant and Mesopotamia. Important sites: Abu Hureyra, Abu Noshra, Avdat area (Boqer Tachtit, Boqer, Ein Aqev, Ein Aqev East, Rosh Zin); Ein Gev, El-Kowm (Nadaouiyeh, Umm el Tlel), El-Wad, Eyan (Mallaha), Gebel Maghara (Mushabi, Lagama), Har Harif (Rosh Horesha, Saflulim, Abu Salem, Ramat Harif), Hayonim Cave and Terrace, Kebara Cave, Ksar Akil, Lower Jordan Valley (Fazael, Urkan e-Rubb, Salibiya), Nahal Hadera (Hefziba), Nahal Oren, Neve David, Ohalo II, Qadesh Barnea, Tor Hamar, Wadi Hammeh, Wadi Hasa (Ain Buhira, Thalab al-Buhira, Tor Sadif, Tor al-Tareeq, Ucagizli, Yutil el-Hasa), Wadi Jilat/Azaq (Jilat 6, Uwaynid, Kharaneh IV), Western Negev Dunes (Azariq, Nizzana, Nahal Lavan, Shunera, Nahal Sekher), Yabrud II-III, Zarzi.. ENVIRONMENT = The Epipaleolithic tradition extends across a period of dramatic climatic change. The tradition begins during the last glacial maximum when the Levant and Mesopotamia were much cooler and drier than today. Over time the climate ameliorated, and by ca. 12,000 B.P., a significant warming trend led to almost ideal conditions for human habitation. By ca. 10,800 B.P., the cooler and drier conditions of the Younger Dryas tool hold of the region, creating the diverse mosaic of environments and microenvironments we see today. Rainfall today varies from over 1000mm to less than 50mm annually, and is generally limited to winter months. Summer across the region are relatively hot and dry.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 122 – 123 "								Middle Paleolithic	102	dashed	"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = During this period, people lived in open air campsites and rock shelters. They used tools primarily made of flint, which were smaller than those of the Lower Paleolithic. These tools included points, scrapers, and blades. They show evidence of extensive retouching, showing that the tools were probable used over an extended period of time. They had a diet of wild goat, sheep, boar, cattle, birds, hare, snail, bat, mouse, red deer, and gazelle. REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Lower Paleolithic	2502	dashed	"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = During this period, people lived in open air campsites and used large and rough stone axes, as well as pebble and flint tools, which were probabaly made on site, as we can see from cores and waste at the site of Barda Balka. They had a diet of wild cattle, goat, sheep, horse, and turtle, and maybe Indian elephant and rhinoceros (the only evidence of these last two in Mesopotamia was found at the site of Barda Balka). IMPORTANT SITES: Barda Balka REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"																		Mesopotamia Lesser-Periods	block	150	230/217/234		off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ as well as the Archaeology Dictionary, which can be found at http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/info.php, and The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, edited by Arthur Cotterell."						TOP	0		0								Republic of Iraq	0.042		REFERENCE = MET timeline								Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq	0.068		REFERENCE = MET timeline								British Mandate	0.076		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = After the fall of the Ottoman Empire during WWI, the League of Nations places Palestine and Iraq under British Mandate. For more information, visit <a href =""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=11&region=wap#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Arabian Peninsula and the Eastern Mediterranean, 1900 A.D.-Present </a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline"								TOP	0.082		0								Ottoman rule	0.466		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The region remains important for international trade, with Baghdad remaining a center of religion and literature. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/otto1/hd_otto1.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ottomans before 1600</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline (1534 for Iraq)"								Safavid Rule	0.492		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/safa/hd_safa.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Safavids before 1600</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Aq Quyunlu Dynasty	0.531		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The name for this dynasty means ""black sheep"" in Turkish. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=08&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iraq, 1400-1600 A.D. </a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Qara Quyunlu Dynasty	0.589		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The name for the dynasty means ""white sheep"" in Turkish. This dynasty is recognized for its patronage of architecture, metalwork, and literature. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=08&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iraq, 1400-1600 A.D.</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Jalayirid Dynasty	0.66		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Founded by a family of Mongols who took control as the Ilkanid Dynasty collapsed. Baghdad again becomes a center for art and culture. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=07&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iraq 1000-1400 A.D, Key Events</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Mamluk rule/ Ilkhanid Period	0.742		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Founded by the grandson of Genghis Khan, Hülegü, who took the title ""Il-Khan"" or lesser Khan, meaning he was a subordinate of the Great Khan ruling in China. Baghdad becomes a provincial capital until the 20th century.For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/ilkh/hd_ilkh.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ilkhanid Period (1256-1353)</a>. REFERENCE = MET timeline, Archaeology Dictionary"								Seljuq Sulanate 	0.945		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Seljuks took over Baghdad in 1055 AD, ending the rule of the Buyid dynasty. They declared themselves the protectors of the Abbasid caliphate and Sunni Islam. During this period Iran was materially and culturally prosperous. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/iselj/hd_iselj.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Seljuqs of Iran</a> REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Buyid Dynasty	1.055		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Controlled the Abbasid caliphate from 945 AD to 1055 AD. From this point until the end formal of the dynasty in 1258, the Abbasid caliphs' power is limited to moral and spiritual guidance as leaders of the Orthodaox Sunni Islam.  For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=07&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iraq 1000-1400 A.D, Key Events</a> REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Abbasid caliphate	1.25		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Islamic art and architecture solidified into a distinct style which spread through the Muslim realm. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/abba/hd_abba.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Abbasid Period (750-1258)</a> REFERENCE = MET timeline, Archeology dictionary"								Umayyad caliphate	1.339		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The first Islamic Dynasty. Often considered the formative period of Islamic art and architecture. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/umay/hd_umay.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Amayyad Period (661-750)</a>  REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary, MET timeline"								Rule of the Rightly Guided Caliphs	1.364		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Four followers of Muhammad spread the message of Islam after his death. For more information, visit <a href="" http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/isla/hd_isla.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Birth of Islam</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline"								TOP	2.138		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Founded by a seminomadic people called the Parni, from a place called Parthava, who invaded the Seleucid satrapy of Parthia, led by their leader Arsaces. After this successful conquest they were known as the Parthians. Their empire equalled Rome in wealth, and lasted for almost 400 years. Their capitol was just south of modern Baghdad, called Ctesiphon. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/part/hd_part.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Parthian Empire (247 B.C.-224 A.D.)</a>  REFERENCE = MET timeline/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Seleucid Dynasty	2.324		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = After the death of Alexander the Great his empire was split among his four generals. Seleucus I took control of Mesopotamia, a large portion of Anatolia (modern Turkey), Northern Syria, and Iran. The dynasty he founded lasted for over 200 years. During this time, new cities were built using Greek grid designs, and while art and architecture of this time reflects a Greek influence, it changed relatively little from previous periods. Writing also changed very little, with the Aramaic alphabet and cuneiform still in use alongside Greek. The old Babylonian gods were still worshipped in traditional temples as well. The Suleucids built 2 capitols, called Seleucia-on-the-Tigris (just south of modern Baghdad) and Antioch-on-the-Orontes (in modern day southern Turkey). REFERENCE = The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Hellenistic rule (Macedonian dynasties)	2.332		REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary								Persian rule	2.55		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This dynasty/Kingdom lasted from the time of Cyrus the Great in 550 B.C. to Darius III in 332 B.C, when it was taken over by Alexander the Great. For more information, visit <a href=""http://http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=Darius+III""> Archaeology Dictionary: Achaemenids</a>  REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary"								Neo-Assyrian / Neo-Babylonian period	2.95		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period in Assyria is characterized by a series of exeptional rulers who founded cities, built impressive buildings, and expanded their territories to well beyond the northern plains. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/assy/hd_assy.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: Assyria, 165-609 B.C.</a>  REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								TOP	3.1		0								Middle Assyrian / Babylonian period	3.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Control was taken back from the Mitanni, though wars with the Mitanni continued until the reign of Shalmaneser I in 1273 B.C. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/assy/hd_assy.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: Assyria, 1365-609 B.C.</a>  REFERENCE = MET Timeline, The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 102"								Mitanni period/ Kassite Interregnum	3.6		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Kassites were an Indo European group of unknown origin who took control of the region around 1600 BC and would continue to control the region for another 400 years, the longest of any group. They eventually began to blend into the Babylonian culture, until the Assyrian king, Ashur-Dan, drove the last Kassite king from the throne in the 12th century BC, returning the region to Semitic control. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.wsu.edu/~dee/MESO/KASSITES.HTM""> Washington State University: Meopotamia-The Kassites</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline, Washington State University"								Old Assyrian / Babylonian period	4		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period is generally regarded as the classical period in babylonian history, especially the Hammurapi era. The culture was a mix of earlier influences, the most important being those of Sumer and Akkad. The spoken language was a dialect of Akkadian, however the written language was a script from Sumer. In Assyria there were 3 fairly autonomous city states: Nineveh, Ashur, and Arbela. Not much is known about Nineveh and Arbela during this period, however we know that Ashur was ruled by a series of vice regents who engaged in many building projects over the centuries, such as temples, palaces, and walls. They also participated in a profitable copper trade with Anatolia. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 78, 90-92, 101-102"								Ur III	4.1		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The core of Ur III was divided into 23 city states which were each ruled by a governor appointed by the king. Outside that core, the land to the north and east was divided into over 90 centers which were ruled by military leaders. Outside that, there was no formal control, however relations were strengthened through political marriages and treaties. This system would have required a lot of organization and accounting to make it work. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 78/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Early Dynastic III Mesopotamia (Sumerian)	4.55		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Marked by the beginning of documented history. During this time, many of the epic tales of the previous period were recorded and preserved. Settlement of this period followed the three main branches of the Euphrates River, with cities in different regions competing for control of the fertile agricultural lands. It was not until the end of this period that Sumer merged into a single, solid political entity.  REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 77"								Early Dynastic II Mesopotamia (Sumerian)	4.65		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Also known as Sumer's Heroic Age. This period is marked by its generation of epic and heroic tales. It is also colored by almost constant war-like conditions. The oldest known king, Men-barage-si, ruled from 2630 BC to 2600 BC and features in many heroic tales. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 76-77"								Early Dynastic I Mesopotamia (Sumerian)	4.9		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Early Dynastic Period Mesopotamia (Sumerian)/ Ninevite V Period = This period shows marked urbanization, with most of the population living in walled cities which each functioned as a political unit, having their own rulers and patron deities. This period is also characterized by cuneiform writing and plain, wheel-made ceramics with conical bowls. Follows the Jamdat Nasr tradition and precedes the Akkadian tradition. The early Dynastic tradition is typically divided into three major phases: Early Dynastic I, in which the main features of the tradition are established; a transitional period called Early Dynastic II; and Early Dynastic III, in which written records become common and the Sumerian empire becomes well established. The tradition ends with the conquest of Sumer by Sargon of Agade.. LOCATION = The lower Tigris, Euphrates, and Diyala river valles in what is today Iraq. IMPORTANT SITES = Abu Salabikh, al-Ubaid, Girsu (Tello), Lagash (al-Hiba), Nippur, Tell Asmar, Tell Agrab, Ur (Tell al-Muqayyar, Uruk  (Warka).. ENVIRONMENT = Climatic conditions in the Early Dynastic tradition were similar to those today. Winters were mild, while summers were hot and dry. Mean annual temperature was between 20 – 25°C, and mean annual rainfall is only about 200mm. These conditions were stable to about 2300 B.C., when an abrupt climate change, noted in globally distributed lake, marine, and speleotherm cores, reduced precipitation to c. 20 – 30% from today's levels. The threefold dust spike that accompanied this abrupt climate change was not reduced to Holocene background levels until ca. 1900 B.C. The abrupt change was synchronous with 1.) the Akkadian imperial collapse, as well as the collapse of sedentary systems in Anatolia, Palestine, Greece and the Aegean, and Egypt. 2.) Amorite pastoral nomad movements that challenged state political authorities, as did “The Sandcrossers” in Egypt.  . REFERENCE = REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 112/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Ubaid 4	6.22		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period at Eridu is characterized by large temples with the same plan as later Sumerian temples. This entailed a sactuary with an alter at one end, and the temples were on raised platforms with clear buttresses at regular intervals. [Ubaid divisions made equal within Ubaid interval for now.] REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 372 - 373/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Ubaid 3	6.44		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = During the Ubaid 3 period, the Ubaid tradition expands into northern Mesopotamia, where it first exists beside and eventually replaces sites of the late Halaf  tradition.[Ubaid divisions made equal within Ubaid interval for now.] REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 372 - 373"								Ubaid 2	6.66		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = By the Ubaid 2 period, there is evidence that Ubaid influence was beginning to spread beyond its original homeland, as indicated by the presence of Ubaid wares along the Arabian coast. At the site of Tell Abada, buildings were characterized by a T-shaped court, with smaller rooms or other T-shaped rooms to either side. This floor plan would be used in later Uruk and Ubaid structures. [Ubaid divisions made equal within Ubaid interval for now.] IMPORTANT SITES = Tell Abada REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 372 - 373/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								Ubaid 1	6.88		0								Ubaid 0	7.1		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Hard-filed ceramic vessels consisting of buff or red paste and decorated with geometric designs in black or red paint. Other distinctive objects include bent-clay nails, clay sickles, and reptilian headed figurines. Architectural features include temples and tripartite structures in which large, frequently T-shaped hall is flanked by a series of rooms on each side. Follows the Aceramic Neolithic tradition and precedes the Late Chalcolithic Mesopotamia tradition. In Mesopotamia, the Ubaid represents the earliest known culture. In central Mesopotamia and Khuzistan, it follows the Samarran period and precedes the Uruk period. In northern Mesopotamia, it follows the Halaf period, which it replaces. It precedes the late Chalcolithic period, represented by Tepe Gawra, which is closesly related to the Uruk tradition of southern Mesopotamia.  [Ubaid divisions made equal within Ubaid interval for now.]. LOCATION = Iraq and western Iran, in what are referred to as Mesopotamia and Khuzistan, respectively. The earliest known sites extend from southern Mesopotamia and Khuzistan to as far north as the Hamrin basin in east-central Iraq. IMPORTANT SITES = Tell el-'Oueili. ENVIRONMENT = The Ubaid period was characterised by major climatic changes. During the beginning of this period, summers would have been somewhat hotter than today. Winter temperatures would have been colder. The beginning of the Ubaid tradition was also marked by a wet monsoonal climatic regime, with rainfall beginning earlier in the fall and ending later in the spring. By the end of the Ubaid tradition, climatic conditions were well on their way toward modern values, with perhaps slightly higher annual temperatures and greater aridity at the end of the Ubaid than today. In northern Mesopotamia, annual seasonality appears to have been extreme. Summer were intensely arid. During the winter, violent rainstorms resulted in erosion of dry soils, incision of wadis, and possible destruction of settlements.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 372 - 373/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"																																								Mesopotamia Events	event	150	230/217/234		off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ as well as the Archaeology Dictionary, which can be found at http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/info.php, and The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, edited by Arthur Cotterell."					EVENT												Separate States	0.082										Cyrus the Great	2.55										"Hittite kingdom overwhelmed by the ""Peoples of the Sea"""	3.182		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The ""Peoples of the Sea"" swept down through Sryia, probably overwhelming the Hittite kingdom along the way. Over the next few centuries, the land once ruled by the Hittites was divided into separate kingdoms, diluting the Hittite culture. By 700BC, they were all absorbed into the Assyrian culture. Essentially, the whole region experience climatic, and thus economic and political crises. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 113-114/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"								King Suppiluliumus I (Hittite)	3.38		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Beginning with the reign of King Suppiluliumus I, the Hittite empire began to rise from near extinction to its height of power. Within 100 years they had formed an empire that rivaled Egypt and Babylon. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 112"								Parattarna	3.5		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The first known king of Mittanni, though Mittanni's presence in the region began approximately a century before Parattarna took the throne when the Hurrians invaded Mesopotamia from the North. Not many records exist from Mittanni, so not much is known about the culture except what is mentioned in texts from other civilizations like Egypt and the Hittites. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 109-110"								Hammurapi inherits kingship of Babylon	3.792		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = King Hammurapi is best known for the Code of Hammurapi, however during his rule he greatly expanded the rule of Babylon so that it covered the whole of the Babylonian plane, as far north as Mari and Ashur (near modern day Baghdad). REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 90-91"								4.2 ka climate event	4.17									FAD												Ottoman expansion	0.466		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/otto1/hd_otto1.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ottomans before 1600</a>  REFERENCE = MET Timeline (1534 for Iraq)"								Islam center shifts from Syria to Iraq	1.25		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Shift of Islam center from Syria to Iraq.  For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/abba/hd_abba.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Abbasid Period (750-1258)</a> REFERENCE = MET timeline, Archeology dictionary"								Alexander the Great	2.332		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Overthrown by Alexander the Great in 332 BC. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=Alexander+the+Great""> Archaeology Wordsmith: Alexander the Great</a>  REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary"								Ashur-uballit I founds Assyrian Empire	3.5										Shamshi-Adad I	3.813		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Samshi-Adad founded an Amorite dynasty at Ashur, and made the first attempt to bring the whole region under the control of one power. At the height of his power, he had control over the land as far out as Babylon and Mari. After his death in 1781 B.C., Ashur was captured by Hammurapi. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 102 "								Fall of Ur to the Amorites.	4		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Ur falls to the Amorites when they invade Meopotamia in 2000 B.C. This marks the beginning of the Babylonian Era. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 78, 90-92, 101-102"								Sargon	4.35		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Semitic-speaking dynasty in current central Iraq founded by Sargon in 2370 BC, with Akkad (Agade), an unidentified site, as his capital.  Source = Archeology online dictionary. REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 21"								Mes-Ane-pada	4.48		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Founded the first dynasty of Ur. Claimed the title ""King of Kishi"", which seems to indicate that he had control over all of Sumer. Shifted the capital or Sumeria to Ur. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 77"							LAD												Mongols sack Baghdad	0.742		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Mongols sack Baghdad, killing the last Abbasid to rule there. Islamic and Arab civilization take a hard blow. Baghdad becomes a provincial capital until the 20th century. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/ilkh/hd_ilkh.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ilkhanid Period</a> REFERENCE = MET timeline, Archaeology Dictionary"																		Mesopotamia Secondary Events	event	150	230/217/234		off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ as well as the Archaeology Dictionary, which can be found at http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/info.php, and The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, edited by Arthur Cotterell."					EVENT												Destruction of the Assyrian capital Nineveh	2.612		EVENT DESCRIPTION = Medes and Babylon formed a coalition and jointly destroyed Nineveh in 612 BC.  REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 105								Medes (from Persia) destroy Assur	2.614		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Medes (from Persia) destroy Assur. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=Assur""> Archaeology Wordsmith: Assur</a>  REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary"								Tukulti-Ninurta I	3.243		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Tukulti-Ninurta led the Assyrian empire to the height of its power. He conducted campaigns against the mountain tribes in the north and east, as well as the Hittites and Babylonians, actually managing to capture and plunder the city of Babylon. He also built a new city across from Asshur which he called Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta. He died in 1207 B.C. when his son led a revolution against him.  REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 102"								Battle of Kadesh	3.286		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = In 1286 BC the Hittites, led by King Muttiwalis, and Egypt, led by  King Ramses II met in one of the most famous battles in ancient history. The battle is one of the most documented in ancient history, but the outcome remains unknown. However the later appearance of a pro Hittite prince and Hittite treaties with Rimisarma of Aleppo and Kizzuwatna seem to indicate a Hittite victory. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 127-128"								Naram-Suen	4.291		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The grandson of Sargon I, he led Akkad to its peak of power. Early in his reign, he allowed Kishi its independence, which left all of Mesopotamia south of Akkad independent. Later in his reign, Kishi, Umma, Uruk, and Nippur formed an alliance and attacked Akkad. During nine engagements within a single year, Naram-Suen routed the alliance and gained control of the south all the way to the Persian Gulf. For this accomplishment, his people came to see him as a god-king, and from then on he was called ""King of the Four Quarters"", and his name was usually written with a marker used for a god. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 86-87"							FAD												Ba'ath Rule	0.037		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The Ba'ath Arab nationalist party comes to power in Syria and Iraq in 1963 after two coups. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=11&region=wap#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Arabian Peninsula and the Eastern Mediterranean, 1900 A.D.-Present </a> REFERENCE = MET timeline"								Ur-Nammu founds the third dynasty of Ur.	4.1		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = During this time Ur-Nammu also built the great ziggurat. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 78/ The Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago"																		Persia (Iran)	:	Persia Periods	Persia Lesser Periods	Persia Events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																	Persia Periods	block	150	230/217/234	notitle		"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	0										Republic	0.021		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Iranian protests against the shah's rule reach a climax in 1979, and he is forced to flee the country. In his place, Ayatollah Khomeini returns from exile in France, and declares the Islamic Republic of Iran and institutes a new constitution. When the shah is allowed to enter the US for medical care, a group of student supporters of the ayatollah occupy the American embassy in protest to the sha's ties with the US. Some of the trapped people are immediately released, but 52 remained captive for 444 days. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=11&region=wai#/Key-Events""> The Metrapolitan Museum of Art: Iran, 1900 A.D.-present.</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Pahlavi Dynasty	0.075		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Reza Khan deposes the last of the Qajar shahs and proclaims himself ruler, founding the Pahlavi dynast. He attempts to institute government reforms which would free the government from religious control, and replaces religious holidays with secular holidays based off of ancient Persian traditions. He also constructs a Trans-Caspian Railraod linking the Persian Gulf to the Caspian Sea. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=11&region=wai#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iran, 1900 A.D.-present.</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Qajar Dynasty	0.221		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The beginning of the Qajar dynasty ushered in an era of peace and unity for the coutry. Qajar shahs were focused on modernizing and reforming the country, allowing new technologies such as the railroad and the telegraph. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/irmd/hd_irmd.htm""> The Metripolitan Museum of Art: Nineteenth-Century Iran: Art and the Advent of Modernity.</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								TOP	0.278										Safavid dynasty	0.499		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Isma'il Safavi and his supporters (known as the Qizilbash, or ""red heads"" after their red caps) took control of Azerbaijan from the Aq Quyunlu, and Isma'il was crowned in Tabriz, becoming the first ruler of the Safavid Dynasty. At the beginning of his rule, Isma'il made Shici Islam the official state religion. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=08&region=wai#/Key-Events'> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iran, 1400-1600 A.D.</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Timurid Rule	0.611		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This dyansty was the last great dynasty to come from the Central Asian Steppe. Founded by Timur after he subjugated all of Central Asia, Iran, and Iraq, as well as parts of Asia and India. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/timu/hd_timu.htm""> The Metropolitan Art Museum: The Art of the Timurid Period (ca. 1370-1507).</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								TOP	0.647										Ilkhanid Period	0.744		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Founded by the grandson of Genghis Khan, Hülegü, who took the title ""Il-Khan"" or lesser Khan, meaning he was a subordinate of the Great Khan ruling in China. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/ilkh/hd_ilkh.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ilkhanid Period (1256-1353)</a>. REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Mongol rulers	0.779		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = After conflicting with the Khwarazmshah Dynasty, the Mongols swept through Iran and took control. Their conquest devastated the region, however in a short period of time the control of most of Asia by the Mongols (the Pax Mongolica) creates an environment of cultural exhange. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=07&region=wai#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Ira, 1000-1400 A.D.</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Seljuq / Khwarazmshah rule	0.945		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Seljuqs took over at the end of the Buyid rule in 1055 A.D., and established themselves as the new protectors of the Abbasid caliphate and Sunni Islam. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/iselj/hd_iselj.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Seljuqs of Iran (ca. 1040-1157)</a>. REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Buyid Rule	1.055		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Controlled the Abbasid caliphate from 945 AD to 1055 AD. From this point until the end formal of the dynasty in 1258, the Abbasid caliphs' power is limited to moral and spiritual guidance as leaders of the Orthodaox Sunni Islam.  For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=07&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iraq 1000-1400 A.D, Key Events</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Samanid Dynasty (Khorasan)	1.1										Saffarid Dynasty	1.127										Tahirid Dynasty	1.18										Abbasid rule	1.25		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Islamic art and architecture solidified into a distinct style which spread through the Muslim realm. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/abba/hd_abba.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Abbasid Period (750-1258)</a> REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary, MET Timeline"								Umayyad rule	1.339		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The first Islamic Dynasty. Often considered the formative period of Islamic art and architecture. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/umay/hd_umay.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Amayyad Period (661-750)</a>  REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary, MET Timeline"								Sasanian empire	1.776		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Ardashir I was a descendant of Sasan, who defeated the Parthians and founded the Sasanian dynasty. During this time, the central government became stronger, and Zoroastrianism was made the state religion. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/sass/hd_sass.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Sasanian Empire (224-651 A.D.)</a>  REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Parthian empire	2.247		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Founded by a seminomadic people called the Parni, who invaded the Seleucid satrapy of Parthia, led by their leader Arsaces. After this successful conquest they were known as the Parthians. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/part/hd_part.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Parthian Empire (247 B.C.-224 A.D.)</a>. REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Hellenistic rule (Seleucid period)	2.332		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Overthrown by Alexander the Great in 332 BC. After his death in 323 B.C., his empire was divided among his generals. His friend  Seleucus Nicator became king over what is today Afgahnistan, Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon, as well as parts of Turkey, Armenia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Tajikstan. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/sleu/hd_sleu.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Seleucid Empire (323-64 B.C.)</a>. REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary, MET Timeline"								Achaemenid dynasty	2.55		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Achaemenid dynasty was founded by Cyrus II, King of Persia at the time, when he defeated King Astyages of Media to the North. It came to an end when Darius III was killed by one of his own generals, allowing Alexander III of Macedon (Alexander the Great) to take the Persian throne. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/acha/hd_acha.htm""> Metropolitan Museum: The Achaemenid Persian Empire (550-330 B.C.)</a>. REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary, MET Timeline"								"Iranian Iron Age (Middle Elamite, Neo-Elamite, Median)"	3.55		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Sedentary agricultural cities with writing, markets, military, and a complex state government. Mass-produced, but regionally distinct ceramics. Iron and bronze tools. Distinctive cylinder seals, wall plaques, and votive sculptures. Follows the Iranian Bronze Age tradition and precedes the historic Archaemenian empire. LOCATION =  The main area of Iranian Iron Age developed is located in what is known today as the Khuzistan, Luristan, Fars, and southern regions of Iran. Important sites: Chogha Zanbil, Godin Tepe, Haft Tepe, Hasanlu, Malyan, Susa.  ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The area is dominated by the Zagros mountains and the river valleys that carry runoff and alluvium from their slopes. In the south of the region, Khuzisatan is an arid plain dependent on the highlands for metals, stone, and wood; whereas Fars, to the east of Khuzistan, contains numerous fertile valleys and abundant resources. In the north, the environment of Luristan and Kurdistan are varied dramatically by elevation, forming a mosaic of fertile valleys, upland steppes, and forests.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 196. 50yr added to Encyclopedia/ The Penguin Encyclopediaof Ancient Civilizations, p. 147"								Iranian Bronze Age	5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Iranian Bronze Age is characterised by a shift from stone tools and weapons to those made of copper and bronze. This period is also noted for its development and use of a form of pictographic writing called Proto-Elamite, which may be derived from the slightly earlier Sumerian script. The use of cylinder and stamp seals are also diagnostic markers for this time period. Dynamic changes are also noted in pottery styles in the latter part of this period, c. 4400 B.P., from painted pottery to that of a grey or grey-black ceramic ware. Whether or not these dynamic cultural changes can be attributed to local developments or are the result of an important intrusion of new people into an area is still not clear. None of these developments can be traced back to Mesopotamia or other areas previously in contact with the inhabitants of the Iranian Plateau. The Iranian Bronze Age tradition follows the Iranian Chalcolithic tradition and precedes the Iranian Iron Age tradition.  LOCATION = The Iranian plateay in eastern and southeastern Iran. Important sites: Bampur, Tappeh Hesar, Tepe Yahya, Shakr-I Sokhta, Tureng Tepe, Sialk IV. ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = There is no strong evidence that the climate of the Bronze Age was much different from the present twenty-first century, although based on pollen analysis, there is some indication that it may have been slightly wetter. In general, the climate of the region is widely diverse, with great variations in temperature and rainfall in different parts of the country. These extremes develop as the plateau is alternately exposed to the dry-hot summer conditions from northwest India and the Siberian winter anticyclonic winds sweeping in from the northeast. The mountain barriers restrict maritime influences to the coastal lowlands, which generate the special humid subtropical weather pattern in the Caspian lowlands, and the hot oppressive Persian Gulf summer climate. Annual rainfall amounts of 40inches occur only in northwest Iran on the Caspian shore. Dry plateau conditions in southeastern Iran, were the annual rainfall amount is less than 5inches, have cause the formation of the great interior salt deserts referred to as the Dasht-i-Kavir and the Dasht-i-Lut. Because of the aridity of this area, there are few streams that flow year round. the Aras, Sefid, Rud, Gorgan, and Atrek Rivers all empty into the Caspian Sea. The Zaindeh River is the principal stream draining the interior plateau region. Lake Urmia in northwestern Iran is the largest of the many salt lakes and marshes in the region.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 156 – 157"								TOP	5.5										Iranian Chalcolithic	7.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Well-fired, grit and vegetable tempered wares that were either slipped or wet-smoothed and burnished. Common painted wares include red painted wares, black-on-buff, and black-on-red fine wares. Decorations commonly consisted of horizontal or vertical bands of lines, zigzags, checkers, and geometrical designs that were filled with diagonal lines or cross hatching. Stylised zoomorphic motifs were also used to decorate ceramic vessels. Vessels bearing polychrome decorations also appear during the Chalcolithic. Differences in the configuration of painted motifs, as well as surface treatment and vessel forms, provide the major basis for defining regional subtraditions. However, there was considerable variation in decoration and vessel forms, even among neighbouring villages throughout the Chalcolithic tradition. Thus, regional subtraditions only reflect broad patterns of similarities between sites and do not necessarily indicate a complete cultural solidarity between villages that made up the traditions. Follows the Neolithic tradition and is succeeded by the Protoliterate traditions. The Iranian Chalcolithic can be subdivided into an Early (7,500 – 6,800 B.P.), Middle (6,800 – 5,900 B.P.), and Late phase (5,900 – 5,500 B.P.) LOCATION = The Zagros and Elburz mountains and associated lowlands and the plateau region of Iran. Important sites: Dalma, Chogha Mish, Seh Gabi, Tal-i-Iblis, Tepe Sabz, Tepe Yahya. ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The Chalcolithic tradition in Iran coincided with the latter part of the Climatic Optimum (10,000 – 6,000 B.P.). Due to greater solar insulation, summers were somewhat hotter and winters colder than today. In neighbouring Mesopotamia, the Chalcolithic tradition was marked by a wet monsoonal climatic regime, with rainfall beginning earlier in the fall and ending later in the spring. Annual seasonality appears to have been extreme, especially in northern Mesopotamia. Summers were intensely arid. During the winter, violent rainstorms resulted in erosion of the dry soils, incision of wasis, and possible destruction of settlements. The extent to which Iran was affected by these climatic events is uncertain, since the mountain-ringed plateau configuration would have sheltered it from these conditions to some extent. The souther plateau region, which is affected by the monsoon system today, would have been affected by these climatic shifts to a greater degree than the interior face of the Zagros mountains. Like today, summers in this part of the plateau were hot, and winters relatively mild, occasionally dropping slightly below freezing. Most precipitation feel during late fall, winter, and early spring. Additionally, torrential downpours were common during late July and August due to the Indian Ocean monsoon system. However, the amount of precipitation was highly variable from place to place and from year to year. Evidence from the Soghun valley on the southeast portion of the plateau indicates that this region experienced somewhat cooler and wetter conditions during the mid 7th millennium B.P. In contrast to the rest of Iran, the region between the Caspian Sea and the Elburz mountains would have experienced greater annual precipitation. The region would have also had milder winters, and warm, relatively humid summers. By the end of the Chalcolithic tradition, modern climatic conditions emerged out of Iran.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 160 – 161"								Iranian Neolithic	11.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Lithic industry largely based on the production of blade-based tools. Ground stone implements include querns, mortars, fully-ground celts, and pierced stones. Other tools include needles, awls, and spatulas made from bone. Handmade, straw-tempered soft war pottery vessels that had been fired at low temperature came into use during the earliest stages of the ceramic Neolithic. These were frequently decorated with red, or occasionally, black or white paint. Common motifs include oblique linear and geometric designs including nested triangles, lozenges, zigzags, and a netlike pattern. Follows the Iranian Mesolithic and is succeeded by the Iranian Chalcolithic. The Neolithic tradition is divided chronologically into an aceramic and a ceramic phase. In the Zagros region and the adjoining lowlands of western Iran, the ceramic phase consists of the Iranian variant of the Hassuna with some Sumerian influences. Although reliable dates are scarce for the earliest Neolithic occupations, the beginning of the aceramic phase of the Neolithic probably began about 11,500 B.P. The ceramic phase began about 8,500 B.P. and ended about 7,500 B.P. LOCATION = The mountains and foothills surrounding the lower lying Iranian plateau. Certain elements of the Iranian Neolithic associated with the region of the Caspian sea and the Elburz highlands extend into southern Azerbaijan and southern Turkmenistan By the last quarter of the eighth millennium B.P, Neolithic communities began to spread beyond the Zagros region into the surrounding lowlands. Important sites: Ali Kosh, Tepe Asiab, Ganj Dareh, Tepe Guran, Hajji Firuz. ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = Sediment cores recovered from several lakes in the Zagros mountains indicate that the climate was on its way towards its current state by the end of the preceding Mesolithic tradition. However, the initial stages of the Neolithic tradition were marked by significant climatic fluctuation, in which average temperature at times were about, and at other times were below that of today. By the end of the Neolithic tradition in Iran, the average summer temperature would have been 2 – 4°C higher than today and winter would have been  – 4°C lower. The Neolithic climatic regime is marked by continental conditions resulting in hot. arid summers and cold, moist winters in the mountains and relatively mild winters in the Khuzistan lowlands. The mountain and basin topography of Iran has a significant influence on climate. The movement of moisture-bearing air masses into the interior regions of Iran is impeded by the highlands surrounding the interior plateau. Thus, the most precipitation falls on the exterior flanks of the mountain ranges with the largest amounts occurring in the region of the Caspian Sea. As a result, the Zagros region was, and still is, considerably more arid than the region between the northern flanks of the Elburz mountains and the Caspian Sea.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.215 – 216"								Iranian Mesolithic	20		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Lithic industry characterised by small blades and blade-based tools. Tools include retouched bladlets, backed bladelets, end scrapers, thumbnail scrapers, borers, and notched and denticulated pieces. A small number of burins were also common as they were duting the preceding Baradostian period. During later stages of the Iranian Mesolithic, geometric microliths came into use. Microburins resulting from the segmentation of blades into smaller pieces are present but relatively compared to contemporary Levantine Epipaleolithic assemblages. Other items include needles, awls, and spatulate tools made of bone; as well as small numbers of pestles, mortars, mullers, querns, and grooved stones made from ground stone. Ground stone implements became more abundant over time and were a common aspect of Terminal Mesolithic# material culture. Caves and rock shelters were extensively used for habitation during the Main Phase of the Mesolithic. This phase of the Mesolithic can be divided geographically into at least two, and probably more subdivisions. In the Zagros mountains and flanking lowlands, it is known as the Zarzian. In the Trans-Caspian region it was originally referred to as the Mazandaranian, but more recently called the Trialetian. Round and oval subterranean dwellings made of stone, wattle, and daub came into use during the Terminal Mesolithic. As of yet, this final phase of the Iranian Mesolithic has only been attested in the Zagros mountains. Follows the Southwest Asian Upper Palaeolithic tradition, which consist of a variation of the Aurignacian know in the Zagros mountain region as the Baradostian. The Iranian Mesolithic is succeeded by the Iranian Neolithic tradition.  LOCATION = The mountains and foothills surrounding the lower lying Iranian plateau with some limited settlement on the interior plateau. The region includes the Zagros mountains of eastern and northern Iraq, parts of southern Azerbaijan and southern Turkmenistan around the Caspian sea, and the highlands of the Elburz mountains. Sites culturally related to the Iranian Mesolithic may have extended into parts of southeast Anatolia. Important sites: Ali Tappeh, Belt Cave, Warwasi, Zarzi, Zawi Chemi Shanidar.  ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = Very little paleoclimatic data pertaining to the Mesolithic are available for Iran. Almost all of the data have come from the Zagros mountains. The modern climatic regime is marked by continental conditions resulting in hot, arid summers and cold, moist winters. The highland regions which create a rain shadow which blocks the movement of moisture bearing air masses into the interior regions of Iran. Most precipitation falls on the exterior flanks of the mountain ranges, which the largest amounts occurring in the region of the Caspian Sea. This basic pattern was probably in existence during the late Pleistocene of which the Mesolithic is a part, although with greater seasonal extremes. During the Mesolithic, average temperatures were at least 5° - 8°C cooler than today, with drier conditions would have prevailed. At the same time, the cooler temperatures may have resulted in decreased evaporation rates, resulting in higher lake levels. The cooler conditions may have resulted in a snow line that was 650m lower than at present. Based on the available data, the climate during the Mesolithic would have been characterised by a semi-arid to arid regime consisting of short, relatively mild summers, and longer, extremely cold winters in the mountains, and somewhat more temperate conditions in the sheltered valleys and lowlands. The end of the Mesolithic corresponds with the onset of warmer, more humid conditions.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 198 – 199"								Iranian Upper Paleolithic	40																				Persia Lesser Periods	block	150	230/217/234		off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	0.492										Aq Quyunlu Dynasty	0.531		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The name for this dynasty means ""black sheep"" in Turkish. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=08&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iraq, 1400-1600 A.D. </a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Qara Quyunlu Dynasty	0.594		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The name for the dynasty means ""white sheep"" in Turkish. This dynasty is recognized for its patronage of architecture, metalwork, and literature. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=08&region=wam#/Key-Events""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iraq, 1400-1600 A.D.</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Muzaffarid Dynasty(in South)/ Jalayirid Rule (in Northwest)	0.66		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The Jalayirids were a Mongol family that established rule over Iraq and Northwestern Iran during the collapse of the Ilkhanid Period. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=07&region=wai#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Iran, 1000-1400 A.D.</a> REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								TOP	2.55										Iron Age III Tradition	2.75		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = It is generally agreed that the widespread appearance of the Iron III culture over the Zagros after 650 B.C. indicates a rapid rise to power for the Medes at that time. REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopediaof Ancient Civilzations, p. 147"								Iron Age II Tradition	3										Iron Age I Tradition	3.55										TOP	5.5										Late Iranian Chalcolithic	5.9										Middle Iranian Chalcolithic	6.8										Early Iranian Chalcolithic	7.5										Ceramic phase of Iranian Neolithic	8.5										Aceramic phase of the Iranian Neolithic	11.5										Terminal Mesolithic	12.5										Main Phase (Iranian Mesolithic)	20																				Persia Events	event	150	230/217/234	notitle	off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."					FAD												Mongols sweep into Iran	0.779		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = ""Following conflict with the Khwarazmshah dynasty (1157–1221), the Mongols sweep through and take control of Iran. Mongol conquests devastate the region and affect the balance of artistic production.""    REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Islam center shifts from Syria to Iraq	1.25		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Shift of Islam center from Syria to Iraq.  For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/abba/hd_abba.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Abbasid Period (750-1258)</a> REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary, MET Timeline"							LAD												Seljuq nomads take over Baghdad	0.945		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = ""The Seljuqs, a Turkic dynasty of Central Asian nomadic origin, become the new rulers of the eastern Islamic lands. Their sovereignty is strengthened with their takeover of Baghdad, which puts an end to Buyid rule (1055) and establishes the Seljuqs as the new protectors of the cAbbasid caliphate and Sunni Islam.""  REFERENCE = MET Timeline"							EVENT												Battle of Thermopylae	2.48		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Xerxes, son of Darius I (Darius the Great) defeated the Spartans at Thermopylae and proceeded on to sack Athens. Afterward, Xerxes had to leave Greece to put down a Babylonian rebellion. The army he left behind lost to the Greeks at the Battle of Plataea in 479 B.C. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/acha/hd_acha.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Achaemenid Persian Empire (550-330 B.C.)</a>. REFERENCE = MET Timeline"								Destruction of the Assyrian capital Nineveh	2.612		EVENT DESCRIPTION = Medes and Babylon formed a coalition and jointly destroyed Nineveh in 612 BC.  REFERENCE = The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations p. 105								Medes (from Persia) destroy Assur	2.614		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Medes (from Persia) destroy Assur. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.archaeologywordsmith.com/lookup.php?terms=Assur""> Archaeology Wordsmith: Assur</a>  REFERENCE = Archeology dictionary"																		Arabia	:	Southern Arabia	Northern Arabia	Arabia Events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																	Southern Arabia	:	S. Arabia Periods	S. Arabia Lesser Periods	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		S. Arabia Periods	block	150	230/217/234	notitle		"Much of the information in this section came from the Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8."						TOP	0										Late Arabian Pastoral	4.2		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Diagnostic and subdivision phases revolve around ceramic traditions, significant innovations in architecture, and the use of readily identifiable lithic/metal materials. Follows the Middle Arabian Pastoral and precedes the historic period. LOCATION = The Sinai, Levant, and the Euphrates and Tigris basins below the Taurus and Zagros mountains. Important sites: Bir Hima complex (southwest Saudi Arabia), Jabrin oasis (eastern Saudi Arabia), Hagif series (western Oman).  ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The region was subjected to considerable stress due to the reduction of annual moisture over mush of the peninsula beginning in the late third millennium B.C. Some scholars have posited a dramatic climatic catastrophe/retreat. Others proposed a gradual retreat to more mordern conditions. However, we know little about the early second millennium B.C about conditions for the area.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.253"								Middle Arabian Pastoral	5.75		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The distinction between Early Arabian Pastoral and Middle Arabian Pastoral is largely artificial, but can be supported on the basis of a marked reduction in the lithic inventory, accompanied by the concomitant rise of copper and bronze production. The end of the Middle Arabian Pastoral is clear. Follows the Early Arabian Pastoral traditions and precedes the Late Arabian Pastoral tradition. LOCATION = Arabian Peninsula Important sites: These include Bir Resisim in the Negev, Rajajil (and the possible comtemporaneaous Wadi Sirhan sites) in North Saudi Arabia, Jawa in Jordan, and Khirbet el Umbashi/Hebariye in southern Syria. (See the Late Arabian Pastoral entry for important southern Arabian sites.) ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = During the early part of the period, conditions described for the Early Arabian Pastoral largely apply. However, during the latter part, in gradual stages, dessication set in as the summer monsoon system weakened and moved southward towards its more present location. Bronze Age societies of the Middle Arabian Pastoral were eventually faced with alternative solutions for remaining in the Arabian peninsula. The percentage of insolation and rainfall (from 300mm to 250mm annually to under 50mm) decreased annually for most of the region during a 200 - 300 year period.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 286"								Early Arabian Pastoral	11		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = These centre on projectile point traditions recognised primarily from Levantine cultural areas and traditions. Northern regional subtraditions include the Epipalaelolithic (Kebaran, Mushabian, Qalhan, Natufian), blade projectile point traditions (Pre-Pottery Neolithic), and the Arabian Bifacial Arrowhead Traditions associated with the Pottery Neolithic. Central and Southern subtraditions are restricted to blade projectile point types and later bifacial variations. For much of the Early Arabian Pastoral, architectural remains may also be important such as kites, stone circle complexes and pillars. Early rock art should also be considered from sites in the Arabian Shield. Follows the Arabian Upper Palaeolithic tradition and precedes the MAP tradition. In terms of regional sequences, the peninsula is divided into the North versus the Centre/South. Northern sequences from the Jordan desert, Syria and Israel are tied into Levantine Epipalaeolithic and Neolithic affiliation. The bulk of the Peninsula has virtually no recognised Epipalaeolithic traditions and the term Neolithic is widely used to cover the period from 8000 – 5750 B.P.  LOCATION = Arabian peninsula. Important sites: Doura Cave and the Kowm basin environs in Syria, the Azraq basin (Kharaneh and Jilat series), the Black Desert (harrah) of eastern Jordon (Kallat Anaza, Dhuweila, Burqu), and the Saudi Arabian sites associated both with the northern and southern margins of the Nafud desert (Kilwa, Umm Wual, Hail, Jubba), Thumama, Saudi Arabian Rub al Kahali lake series, the Ramlat Sabatayn, the Yemeni Saadah locales, Habarut, and the Omani Wadi Ghadun/Hailat Araka locations (Matafa TA 95 – 150).  ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The Early Holocene represents a significant improvement from today's climate, due in part to the northward displacement of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) caused by the Southwest Monsson. Summer rainfall exceeded 250mm on average over much of the peninsula, and created permanent lakes in the Rub al Khali, Nafud, and the desert regions of southwest Iraq, eastern Jordon, and southwest Syria. Average centigrade temperatures were a number of degrees higher. By 5750 B.P. a decline in precipitation had begun, which resulted in modern conditions by 5000 – 4000 B.P.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 77 – 78"																		S. Arabia Lesser Periods	block	150	230/217/234		off	"Much of the information in this section came from the Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8."						TOP	2.3										Late Iron Age III	2.6		"RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.239"								Late Iron Age II	3.1		"RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.239"								Late Iron Age I	3.35		"RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.239 (50yr added to Encyclopedia)"																		Northern Arabia	:	N. Arabia Periods	N. Arabia Lesser Periods																			N. Arabia Periods	block	150	230/217/234	notitle		"Much of the information in this section came from the Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, as well as the Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	0										al-Saud dynasty	0.254										Ottoman rule	0.483		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = After the Ottoman conquest of Syria and Egypt and the overthrow of the Mamluk sultanate, the sharif of Mecca accepted Ottoman rule. Once they were the protectors of the Holy Cities of Islam, the Ottomans took charge of organizing the yearly pilgramage to Meacca, and ensuring the safety of pilgrims. The Ottoman style of architecture found in Istanbul begins to be found in this region. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=08&region=wap#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Arabian Peninsula, 1400-1600 A.D.</a> or <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/otto1/hd_otto1.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ottomans before 1600</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Mamluk rule	0.742		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The slave soldiers of the Ayyubid sultans overthrew the last Ayyubid sultan in Egypt, al-Malik al-Ashraf, and established their own rule. Within a short period of time, the Mamluks controlled the greatest Islamic empire of the later Middle Ages. This included control of the Islamic holy cities, Mecca and Medina. The capital, Cairo, became the economic, cultral, and artistic center of the Islamic world. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/maml/hd_maml.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Mamluk Period (1250-1517)</a>. RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Abbasid caliphate	1.25		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Islamic art and architecture solidified into a distinct style which spread through the Muslim realm. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/abba/hd_abba.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Abbasid Period (750-1258)</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Umayyad caliphate	1.339		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = The first Islamic Dynasty. Often considered the formative period of Islamic art and architecture. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/umay/hd_umay.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Amayyad Period (661-750)</a>  RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								TOP	2.3										Late Arabian Littoral	3.35		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Handmade coarse pottery that appears to have been fired at low temperature; incised stone vessels; bronze weapons. Follows the Middle Arabian Littoral tradition and precedes the historic period. Three primary divisions which are typically referred to as the Late Iron Age (LIA) LOCATION = East and southeast coast of the Arabian peninsula. Important sites: al-Hajjar, al-Madam I, Muweilah, Rafaq II, Rumeilah, Shimal, Tell Abraq. ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = There is no specific evidence on the climate during this period. It can be assumed that it was not that radically different than today.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.239 (50yr added to Encyclopedia)"								Middle Arabian Littoral	7		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = People begin settling along the eastern Arabian Littoral. This period is characterized by well made tanged arrowheads, handmade coarse ceramics, stone vessels, copper and bronze tools, burials typically in mounds or cairns.  Economy based on fishing, hunting, and herding, stone archticture, manufacture of stone/flint tools, stone and shell beads, and other ornaments and small the presence of amounts of Ubaid pottery and other small items from Mesopotamia. Follows the Early Arabian Littoral tradition and precedes the Late Arabian  Littoral tradition.   LOCATION = The east and southeast coast of the Arabian peninsula. Important sites: Barbar (Bahrain), Hili 8 (Oman), Ra's al-Hamra 5 (Oman), Ra's al-Qal'at (Bahrain), Saar (Bahrain), Umm an-Nar (Oman) ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The Arabian peninsula has been arid throughout the Holocene. However, in the middle Holocene a period of higher precipitationled to an expansion of grasslands and a consequent increase in both plant and animal populations. It was at this time that human groups began penetrating the Arabian peninsula and exploiting the ocean and coastal resources that figure prominently in the Early Arabian Littoral tradition. A return to a more contemporary climate took place during the Middle Arabian Littoral tradition. A return to a more contemporary climate took place during the Middle Arabian Littoral tradition. Grasslands were reduced, and settlement was largely restricted to a narrow coastal belt were good agricultural soils, a high water table, and ocean and coastal resources allowed sedentary life to develop.  REFERENCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 284"								Early Arabian Littoral	11		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Narrow and thin blade arrowheads, sometimes tanged. Follows Arabian Upper Palaeolithic, precedes Middle Arabian Littoral LOCATION = The east coast of the Arabian peninsula. Important sites: Ra's al-Hamra 10, Wadi Dawasir. ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The Arabian peninsula was arid throughout the Holocene. However, moderate grasslands were apparently present around lakes that formed in basins adjacent to stabilize dunes. In the Middle Holocene, a period of higher precipitation led to an expansion of these grasslands and a consequent increase in both plant and animal populations. At this time, human groups began penetrating the Arabian peninsula and following a broad spectrum hunting-fishing-gathering lifestyle. Of particular importance to these foragers were ocean and coastal sites figure prominently in the Early Arabian Littoral tradition.   RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 75"								Arabian Late Paleolithic	40		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Small, often crude blade tools made of local flints. Stemmed or tanged blade projectile points appear late in the tradition. Follows Mousterian, precedes Early Arabian Littoral and Early Arabian Pastoral. Location: Northern portions of the Arabian peninsula and southern portions of the Near East.  The interior of the Arabian peninsula was, as it is today, hyperarid. Despite its aridity, the area supported a variety of scattered plant covers and grasses. Small lakes created by runoff from stabilised dunes provided regular sources of water for animals and humans. A great diversity of arid-adapted animal species was present, including oryx, gazelle, ostrich and camel. RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.24"																		N. Arabia Lesser Periods	block	150	230/217/234		off	"Much of the information in this section came from the Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8."						TOP	2.3										Late Iron Age III	2.6		"RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.239"								Late Iron Age II	3.1		"RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.239"								Late Iron Age I	3.35		"RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.239 (50yr added to Encyclopedia)"																		Arabia Events	event	150	230/217/234	notitle	off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."					FAD												Islam center shifts from Syria to Iraq	1.25		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Shift of Islam center from Syria to Iraq.  For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/abba/hd_abba.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Abbasid Period (750-1258)</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline"								Emigration of Muhammad	1.378		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = His message unpopular in Mecca, Muhammad and his followers were forced by the leaders of Mecca to emigrate to Yathrib (Medina). This happaened in the year of the hijra (emigration), and marks the beginning of the Muslim calandar. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/isla/hd_isla.htm""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Birth of Islam</a>. "							LAD												Baghdad sacked by Mongols	0.742		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Mongols sack Baghdad, killing the last Abbasid to rule there. Islamic and Arab civilization take a hard blow. Baghdad becomes a provincial capital until the 20th century. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/ilkh/hd_ilkh.htm""> Metropolitan Museum of Art: The Art of the Ilkhanid Period</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline"																													India and South Asia	:	Indus Valley	South Asia	Ganges	Central Indian	South Indian	Greater India	_METACOLUMN_OFF														Indus Valley	:	Indus Valley Main Periods	Indus Valley Lesser Periods	Indus Valley Events																		Indus Valley Main Periods	block	150	230/217/234	nititle		"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	0										TOP	3.8	dashed	"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period is characterized by the breakdown of the previously integrated culture of the Indus Valley region into small, localized groups. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=03&region=ssa#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: South Asia, 2000-1000 B.C.</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline/ Stage 5, age from Table 1 in Schuldenrein et al (2004, based on Possehl 1999 and Kenoyer 1998)"								Harappan	5.2		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Early Harappan (Stage 3) was characterised by a continuation of village farming communities and pastoralism, with the latter engaging in transhumance between highland regions in summer and lowland floodplains in winter, penetrating deeper into the riverine zones in search of pasture during this stage (Possehl, 2002).  --  as given in Brooks (2006, p.39). For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=02&region=ssa#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: South Asia, 8000-2000 B.C.</a> RESOURCE = MET online"								Indus Neolithic	9		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Semi-sedentary to sedentary communities with permanent buildings made of hand-formed mud brick or pise and structures made with posts and plastered reeds. The main subsistence items are wild grains and wild animals, along with domestic sheep/goat and cattle, and cultivated wheat and barley. Wild fruits such as dates and jujube supplemented the diet. There is a phase of preceramic Neolithic basketry, some with bitumen coating and unfired clay containers. This is followed by the introduction of fragile low-fired pottery, some of which is basket impressed. Other finds include bone and antler tools, blade technology and retouched blades or geometric microliths. There are stone vessels and grinding stones with pestles and a wide variety of ornaments, including locally produced soft stone beads and beads made from exotic materials. Flex burials are located in cemeteries or abandoned domestic areas. Follows the South Asian Upper Palaeolithic tradition and precedes the Early Indus tradition.  LOCATION = The main type site is Mehrgarh on Kachi plan of Baluchistan at the foot of the Bolan Pass. Sites with possible Neolithic occupation levels have been found in other parts of the Indus valley, western piedmont zone, and upland plateaus, sucah as the Quetta valley. Sites can be expected along the Makran coast and delta near Karachi. Important sites: Mehrgarh, Kili Gul Mohammad. ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The greater Indus valley is dominated by two different weather systems that sometimes overlap, the winter cyclonic systems of the western highlands and the summer monsoon system in the peninsular regions. Along the southern Indus river in Sindh, there is often little or no rain, but the rivers bring down the floodwaters from the north and cover the land with rich silts. When both the winter and summer rains are bountiful, the land is extremely rewarding. Usually one or the other system provides enough water to sustain agriculture and herding from one year to the next; it is extremely rare for both systems to fail. The climatic cycle in place today is probably not that much different from that experienced by the Indus Neolithic settlements although evidence suggests a slightly moister climate with a stronger summer monsoon and more season fluctuation of temperatures. In July, it would have been warmer at present and in January slightly cooler.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 151 to 152"																		Indus Valley Lesser Periods	block	150	230/217/234			"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."						TOP	0										TOP	3.3										Late Harappan	3.8	dashed	"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = This period is characterized by the breakdown of the previously integrated culture of the Indus Valley region into small, localized groups. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=03&region=ssa#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: South Asia, 2000-1000 B.C.</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline/ Stage 5, age from Table 1 in Schuldenrein et al (2004, based on Possehl 1999 and Kenoyer 1998)"								Mature Harappan	4.6		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = [‘‘Mature Harappan’’ phase (Stage 4) associated with large urban centres such as Harappa, Mohenjo-Daro, Chanhu-Daro, Kalibangan and Lothal.]  "" mature period 2600–1900 BCE"" (Wikipedia entry).  Writing, bureaucracy, increased social stratification  -- Possehl (2002) as given in Brooks (2006, p.39). For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=02&region=ssa#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: South Asia, 8000-2000 B.C.</a>   RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 271/ Phase C.  Stage 4C, age from Table 1 in Schuldenrein et al (2004, based on Possehl 1999 and Kenoyer 1998) Phase B.  Stage 4B, age from Table 1 in Schuldenrein et al (2004, based on Possehl 1999 and Kenoyer 1998) "								Early Harappan (early Indus Chalcolithic)	5.2		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Early Harappan (Stage 3) was characterised by a continuation of village farming communities and pastoralism, with the latter engaging in transhumance between highland regions in summer and lowland floodplains in winter, penetrating deeper into the riverine zones in search of pasture during this stage (Possehl, 2002).  --  as given in Brooks (2006, p.39). For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=02&region=ssa#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: South Asia, 8000-2000 B.C.</a> RESOURCE = MET online"								Indus Stage 2	6.3										"Early Indus (PreHarappan, Early Harappan)"	7.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Each of the different phases is distinguished by regional pottery styles. No styles or forms are shared throughout the various regions, but some general similarities are seen in the use of sandy applique and polychrome decorations. Pottery shapes include globular jars with short necks and simple everted rims, bowls with simple rims and bilaterally projecting (nailhead) rims. Terracotta bangles fired grey with incised designs are found in many sites, and in the later phases red-fired bangles begin to appear. Geometric button seals made from bone, shell terracotta, and fired steatite are found in most sites. Pre-firing potter's marks and post-firing graffiti are also a common feature. By around 4800 B.P., some of the post-firing graffiti can be identified as a form of Early Indus script. At this same time, we see the first use of cubical limestone weights, steatit seals with script, and animal motifs and clay sealings in trade goods. Follows the Indus Neolithic tradition and precedes the Mature Indus tradition. LOCATION = Settlements are found throughout most of modern Pakistan, parts of northwestern India, specifically the states of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, and Gujarat. There is evidence for direct contanct with the Seistan region of Afghanistan and southeastern Iran, but so far no actual Early Indus sites have been discovered in those areas. Important sites: Harappa, Balakot, Mehgarh/Nausharo, Kalibangan, Kot Diji, Gumla, Sarai Khola, Jalilpur, Rehmandheri, Amri, Ghazi Shah.  ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The greater Indus valley is dominated by two different weather systems that sometimes overlap, the winter cyclonic systems of the western highlands and the summer monsoon system in the peninsular regions. Along the southern Indus river in Sindh, there is often little or no rain, but the rivers bring down the floodwaters from the north and cover the land with rich silts. When both the winter and summer rains are bountiful, the land is extremely rewarding. Usually one or the other system provides enough water to sustain agriculture and herding from one year to the next; it is extremely rare for both systems to fail. The climatic cycle in place today is probably not that much different from that experienced by the Early Indus settlements although evidence suggests a slightly moister climate with a stronger summer monsoon and more season fluctuation of temperatures. In July, it would have been warmer at present and in January slightly cooler.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 116 to 117"								Aceramic Neolithic (Pre-Pottery Neolithic)	10.5		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = Stone or mud-brick architecture; lithic assemblages with high percentage of blade or bladelet production; medium to large symmetrical projectile points; domesticated wheat, barley, peas, and lentils; managed  or domesticated goats; clay animal and human figurines; stone or plaster vessels, but pottery is rare. The Aceramic Neolithic marks the beginning of village life in Southwest Asia. Aceramic Neolithic villages had many attributes of agricultural communities: large settlement size, substantial architecture long settlement duration, intensive  harvesting of seeds with sickles, equipment and facilities for storing and grinding seeds, and containers. Follows the Natufian tradition and is succeeded by the Ceramic Neolithic tradition.  LOCATION = The Levant, Syria, northern Iraq, southeastern Turkey Important sites: Abu Hureyra, 'Ain Ghazal, Basta, Beidha, Bouqras, Göbeckli Tepe, Jarmo, Jericho, Kfar ha-Horesh, Mureybet, Nahal Hemar, Nemrik 9, Netiv Hagdud, Qermez Dere, Tell Maghzaliyah ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = The period began during the cold, dry Younger Dryas. About 10,000 B.P. , an increase in temperature and humidity left the lowlands frost-free in winter. Today, in most parts of Southwest Asia, seasonal precipitation is concentrated from November to April. There is some evidence that Holocene summers had rain, possibly because of a northerly route of monsoon winds. In general, the Aceramic Neolithic experienced relatively favourable conditions.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p.1"								South Asian Late Paleolithic	30		"INTERVAL CHARACTERISTICS = A comparatively recenty recognised cultural stage, Upper Palaeolithic tradition of South Asia awaits good habitational deposits and rich cultural remains. The blade based toolkit of the major tradition is marked by mediocre blade technology -1/3 to 50% of the blades in a collection, in which the fine long blades are restricted. Various forms of backed blades and knives are fairly well made. Burin technology is not common and when found exhibits a few simple forms. Microblades and microliths form an intergral part of the collections. There is also little evidence for art and craft activities and use of other media. however, in some regions, bone, ostrich eggshells, and marine shell objects have been found. Follows the East Asian Middle Palaeolithic tradition and the South Asian Microlithic tradition.  LOCATION = This tradition seems to exist in small regional pockets, the important ones being the Vindhyan hills and the Ganga plains of Central India, the Tapi valley of Maharashatra, and the mideastern coastal region falling in Andhra Pradesh. Some less prominent groups appear to exist in parts of the West Bengal and Thar desert of Western India. Important sites: Ainchwara, Baghor (Son Valley), Laharia-dih, Chopani-mando, Sarai-Nahar-Rai, and Patne. ENVIRONMENT/CLIMATE = At the technocultural change from the Middle Palaeolithic to the Upper Palaeolithic, climatic conditions of South Asia were generally tropical and humid. But the development of blade based culture evidenced arid and hot conditions. The paleoclimate studies carried out in the Thar desert of western India indicate that short climatic cycles of dry and humid conditions prevailed in the peninsula during the Terminal Pleistocene and Early Holocene periods. Particularly at around 18,000 B.P., climatic conditions were marked by lower precipitation. This was the time when blade-based cultures flourished on a large scale, and in comparison to early Upper Palaeolithic times, had a wider spread. Sites of the earlier phase, the Middle Palaeolithic, were many, in camparison to which Upper Palaeolithic localities were restricted. However, in the succeeding phase, around 18,000 B.P., the Upper Palaeolithic mode of subsistence gained momentum. The following wet phase of around c. 10,000 B.P. gave impetus to the Mesolithic way of life, which in archaeological records is the transition stage between Upper Palaeolithic and the early Mesolithic. It may be further assumed that Upper Paleolithic tradition flourished only in regions of South Asia where the climatic conditions during the Terminal Pleistocene and early Holocene periods were moderate and the fluctuations were short cycles of humid and dry spells. The cold regions such as the Himalayan mountains of north India and wet zones of the eastern Indian subcontinent remain devoid of Upper Palaeolithic and Mesolithic remains.  RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 326 to 327"																		Indus Valley Events	event		210/190/200	nititle	off	"A large amount of data for this section came from The Metropolitan Museum of Art's online timeline, which can be found at http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/."					FAD												Pakistan independence	0.053										Wadi Suq period	3.7		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The focus shifts back to the Arabian mainland and a new style of pottery and different tombs are found; some cities such as Tell Abraq continue in use, but there are some major changes in settlement patterns RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 284"								Localization era begins	3.9										Early Dilmun (Barbar)	4.2		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The focus shifted to Bahrain, which became a flourishing trading post in the copper trade between the Indus, Oman, and Mesopotamia. RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 270 (284 for event)"								Large new urban centers	4.6										Kot Diji Phase	4.8										Umm-an-Nar period	5		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Settlement is focused on the lower gulf at sites like Umm-an-Nar and in the inland oases like Hili and Bat. RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 284"								Ravi Phase	5.5										Amri Phase	5.6										Hakra Phase	5.6										Balakot Phase 	6										Developed farming communities	6.3										"Farming begins, Indus Stage 1"	9									LAD												Wadi Suq period	3.2		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The focus shifts back to the Arabian mainland and a new style of pottery and different tombs are found; some cities such as Tell Abraq continue in use, but there are some major changes in settlement patterns RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 284"								Early Dilmun (Barbar)	3.7		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = The focus shifted to Bahrain, which became a flourishing trading post in the copper trade between the Indus, Oman, and Mesopotamia. RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 284"								Umm-an-Nar Period	4		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Settlement is focused on the lower gulf at sites like Umm-an-Nar and in the inland oases like Hili and Bat. RESOURCE = Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 8, p. 284"								Widespread abandonment of sites	4.6										Kot Diji Phase	4.6										Hakra Phase	4.8										Ravi Phase	4.8										Amri Phase	5										Balakot Phase 	5.5									EVENT												Aryan migration into region	3.5		"EVENT DESCRIPTION = Around 1500 B.C. India was invaded by tribes from Iran calling themselves Arya. They spoke an Indo European language, and it is probable that by 500 B.C. Aryan speech (Sanskrit) and culture had gained prominence in the area. For more information, visit <a href=""http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/ht/?period=03&region=ssa#/Key-Events""> The Metropolitan Museum of Art: South Asia, 2000-1000 B.C.</a> RESOURCE = MET Timeline/ The Penguin Encyclopedia of Ancient Civilizations, p. 182."																		South Asia	:	South Asian Periods	South Asian Sub-Periods	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		South Asian Periods	block	150	230/217/234	nititle	off							TOP	3500		Top of the South Asian Microlithic								South Asian Microlithic	8650		"Microlithic implements are the characteristic finds from these sites. Implements less than  1-5 cm long were used as composite tools and are easy to identify. They were made from locally available fine grained rocks and occasionally, silicified and fossilised wood. The types of microlithic tools found are blades, points, arrowheads, burins, borers, awls, scrapers, small choppers, and many others. Other finds are ground plans of circular and oval huts, hearths, charred wild grains, fragile handmade pottery, anvils and hammer stones, animal bones, antlers and shells, human burials (both single and double) with grave goods, bone ornaments and artifacts, pieces of hematite and ochre pieces and a number of painted rocks shelters. Follows the South Asian Upper Palaeolithic tradition, precedes and overlaps with the later Neolithic traditions of South Asia."								TOP	12000		Top of the South Asian Upper Paleolithic 								South Asian Upper Paleolithic	40000		"Tools made using retouched blades, including scrapers, burins, backed knives, and projectile points. A microlithic technology develops and becomes predominant late in the tradition. The settlements were small and aphemeral, representing seasonal base camps for some ten or twenty people. Primary locations were in caves or large rock shelters with easy access to water and where several environments (valley floor and uplands) could be exploited. Most were forested areas or in locations with ready access to firewood. Follows the Mousterian tradition, precedes the Iranian Mesolithic tradition. "																		South Asian Sub-Periods	block	150	230/217/234	nititle	off							Top	7		South Asian Late Paleolithic								South Asian Late Paleolithic	30		"A comparatively recently recognised cultural stage, Upper Palaeolithic tradition of South Asia has good habitational deposits and rich cultural remains. The blade based toolkit of the major tradition is marked by mediocre blade technology -1/3 to 50% of the blades in a collection, in which the fine long blades are restricted. Various forms of backed blades and knives are fairly well made. Burin technology is not common and when found exhibits a few simple forms. Microblades and microliths form an intergral part of the collections. There is also little evidence for art and craft activities and use of other media. however, in some regions, bone, ostrich eggshells, and marine shell objects have been found. Follows the East Asian Middle Palaeolithic tradition and the South Asian Microlithic tradition. "																		Ganges	:	Ganges Periods	Ganges Sub-Periods	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		Ganges Periods	block	150	230/217/234	nititle	off							TOP	0.5		Top of the Ganges Neolithic (Ganges Neolithic – Chalcolithic) 								Ganges Neolithic (Ganges Neolithic – Chalcolithic) 	4.5		"Coarse, unpainted pottery was cord-impressed, rusticated, and burnished red and black. Other material attributes include bone/antler artifacts, Neolithic axes and adzes of basalt and granite, microliths of chert, silica, chalcedony, agate, and carnelian. Microliths include parallel blades, blunted-back blades, points, scrapers, lunates, triangles, trapezes and tranchets. Large stone objects include food-processing equipment like quern, muller, and rubber, and miscellaneous objects like stone balls. The introduction of iron did not have much effect on the overall lifestyle. Follows the South Asian Microlithic tradition and precedes the Gangetic India tradition. The dates from the Mahagara and Kunjhun II suggest the beginning of the western Neolithic tradition around the mid-fifth millennium  B.P. - some 500 years before the eastern Neolithic. "																		Ganges Sub-Periods	block	150	230/217/234	nititle	off							TOP	2		Top of the Vedic								Vedic (Ganges Neolithic)	3.9		"The development and spread of the Indo-Gangetic tradition, from circa 1900 to 800 B.C., characterized by the spread of Indo-Aryan languages, the proliferation of settlements across the Gangetic Plain, and the increasing use of iron and the horse. Source: MET Timeline. Follows the Mature Indus tradition and precedes the historic period. The Indian subcontinent emerges from prehistory during the Vedic period, beginning at about 1000 B.C. the earliest Sanskrit texts date to this era or possibly a century or two earlier. "																		Central Indian	block	150	230/217/234		off							TOP	2.1		Top of the Cental Indian Iron Age (Central Indian Megalithic)								Cental Indian Iron Age (Central Indian Megalithic)	3.25		"The appearance of iron tools and weapons at several sites in central India is the primary diagnostic of the Indian Iron Age, which seems in general to be an outgrowth of the earlier Chalcolithic period without evidence for major sociocultural or political transformations. Unfortunately, final site reports have yet to appear for the important sites of Eran, Nagda, and Ujiain, making it difficult to assess chronology and characteristics of the period. Black and red ware is widespread. Other wares of the same period are more localized and include micaceous red wares and black slipped wares, among others. Ornaments of semiprecious stones, coral, ivory, glass, terracotta, and agate beads. In the Vidarbha region, megalithic mortuary features occur in small and large cemeteries; all are stone circles with internal stone cairns. Follows the Central Indian Chalcolithic tradition (c. 4700 – 3100 B.P.) and precedes, and in some areas overlaps with, the historic period. "								Central Indian Chalcolithic	5		"Three distinct Chalcolithic cultural traditions, namely Kayatha, Ahar, and Malwa, have been identified and are commonly referred to as the Chalcolithic cultures. Culturally the various Chalcolithic phases display certain common traits including painted wheelmade ceramics, a specialised blade/flake industry of copper, farming, stock-raising, pastoral and a limited hunting-based subsistence. Constructed either rectangular or round mud houses. Follows the South Asian Microlithic tradition and precedes the Central Indian Iron Age. The recent excavations at Balthal in Rajasthan suggested that the Chalcolithic communities of the Ahar tradition began earlier at about 5000 B.P. whereas the Malwa plateau shows the beginnings around 4200 B.P. This suggests that agriculture and a settled way of life were accepted first in the western part of Central India and then moved eastward onto the Malwa plateau. "																		South Indian	block	150	230/217/234		off							TOP	0										South Indian Iron Age	3.1		"Megalithic mortuary features in a wide variety of forms. These include above-ground and subterranean stone chambers, sometimes enclosed thin stone circles or covered by cairns; rock-cut chambers, urn burials (sometimes with caps stones), stone alignments, and isolated standing stones, among others. Cemetaries vary widely in size. The majority of the reported sites have consisted of less than ten graves, but some have had up to 1500 graves. Diagnostic artifacts include polished black and red ware ceramics; during the latter part of the period, rouletted ware, and russet coated painted wares occur. Copper implements and iron tools and weapons are common, as is evidence of iron smelting. Settlement hierarchy has been documented in several regions, with large settlements ranging from 20-50 ha in size. Follows the South Indian Neolithic tradition (c. 4,700-3,100 B.P), and precedes (and in some areas, overlaps with) the historic period. "								South Indian Chalcolithic	5		"South Indian Chalcolithic cultures are divided on a regular basis on their characteristic ceramic types and paintings thereon and the presence of copper/bronze objects. Their distinctinctive housing types, agropastoral mode of subsistence, and chiefdom-based social structure are also diagnostic. Follows the South Asian Microlithic tradition and precedes the South Indian Iron Age."																		Greater India	event		210/190/200	notitle							FAD												India independence	0.053		"Freedom at Midnight, 14 Aug 1947"								Mauryan Empire	2.323		Peak under emperor Ashoka (286-231 BC) who spread Buddhism.  Source = Archeology dictionary								Gangetic India (Northern Block Polished Ware)	2.5		"Siddhartha Gautama Buddha lived 563-483 BC. Highly lustrous ware that had emerged a couple of centuries before the beginning of the tradition under consideration. It was initially named Northern Black Polish Ware. Other attributes included moulded figurines and plaques in terra-cotta, punch marked coins in silver and copper, terra-cotta ring wells, and kiln baked bricks. Follows the Ganges Neolithic and precedes the Kushan period."								Iron working	3.25		"ca. 1300–1200 B.C. The earliest evidence of ironworking has been found at the center of the developing Indo-Gangetic culture, near present-day New Delhi and Mathura. Source: MET Timeline"								Aryan migration into region	3.5										Farming communities	5		Appeared after the beginning of the Central Indian Chalcolithc							LAD												Gangetic India (Northern Block Polished Ware)	2		Top of the Gangetic India (Northern Block Polished Ware)								Mauryan Empire	2.15									EVENT												Ashoka	2.26		"Ashoka (r. ca. 273–232 B.C.), third ruler of the Mauryan empire, controls all but the southern tip of the subcontinent. In 260 B.C., Ashoka converts to Buddhism. Source: MET Timeline"								Vedas composition begins	3.5		"ca. 1500 B.C. onward The Vedas—collections (samhita) of sacred hymns in Sanskrit—are composed and transmitted orally. Used by Brahmin priests during ritual and sacrificial ceremonies, these texts represent the primary extant evidence about the culture of the period.  Source: MET Timeline"																													East Asia and Oceania	:	E. Asia - Oceania generalized intervals	Mongolia	China	Japan	Other SE Asia	Australia	Oceania														E. Asia - Oceania generalized intervals	:	Generalized SE-Asia ages	_METACOLUMN_OFF																			Mongolia	:	Mongolia intervals	Mongolia events	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		China	:	Generalized China	North China	South China	Central China	China events																Japan	:	Japan intervals																				Other SE Asia	:	Southeast Asia - Mainland	Korea sub-interval	Indo-Malaysia	_METACOLUMN_OFF																	Australia	:	Australia intervals	Australia event																			Oceania	:	Oceania - Micronesia	Oceania - Polynesia	Oceania - Melanesia	Oceania migrations																												Generalized SE-Asia ages	block	150	208/207/215	notitle	off							TOP	0										Bronze Age	3.6		"Source = Encyclopedia (Divided by region, no overall description)"								Late Neolithic	7		Late Neolithic (China) ca. 5000-2000 BC. Source = MET Timeline								Early Neolithic (Homo sapiens)	12										Late Paleolithic	40		"Source = Encyclopedia (Divided by region, no overall description)"								East Asian Middle Paleolithic 	200		"Flake and core tools made from locally available raw materials are the primary material attributes for this hunting and gathering tradition. Tool kits are variable and include choppers, scrappers, picks, awls, and gravers, as well as other types. Tools show unifacial and some bifacial flaking, with unidirectional and alternate retouch. Sites are associated with Middle to Late Pleistocene animals, many of which are now extinct. Cultural materials other than stone tools include some evidence of bone modification and controlled use of fire. "								Homo erectus (Peking Man)	500																				Mongolia intervals	block	150	208/217/215	notitle	off							TOP	0										Republic	0.079										-	0.088										Manchu (Qing)	0.309										-	0.498										Mongol (Golden Horde)	0.794										Uighur kingdom	1.256										Turkish khanate	1.448										Juan-juan empire	1.6										TOP	2.3		Top of the Early Nomad (Karasuk)								Early Nomad (Karasuk)	3		"Flat-bottomed ceramics decorated with incised or painted geometric designs were used. Bronze and iron working was well developed, and there are some diagnostic items, which include curved bronze daggers and stag and ram's head designs. Despite these features, the primary diagnostic attributes come from burials. The Early Nomads buried their dead in coffins made of stone slabs. In the east, these were large and often surrounded by a circular enclosure, whereas in the west they were sometimes covered by a mound of earth. "								Late Xiajiadian	3.6		"Bronze artefacts such as knives, daggers, and decorative plaques are the best known late Xiajiadian objects. Li and ding tripods and pedestal-leg dou vessels dominate the ceramic assembly. The firing temperatureof these vessels was probably low, producing soft, crumbly ceramics with a nonhomogenuous colour. Investment in permanent domestic structures is usually minimal. More energy is invested in the construction of graves, which are usually earthen pits lined with stone slabs. "								Early Xiajiadian (Xiajiadian Xiaceng)	4.2		"Grey-brown sand-tempered pottery, often decorated with incised net motifs, band decorations, cord marks, as well as application of clay bands and buttons. Gray burnished pottery is less common, while polychrome pottery is confined to graves. Ceramic tripods are common; many are polished. Circular houses, sometimes with two concentric walls, built of stone or stamped earth walls and contain internal platforms and large rectangular structures. Deep pit graves, some with internal wooden structure. "																													Mongolia events	event		208/207/215	notitle	off						FAD												Genghis Khan	0.794		"1206 Temujin is enthroned as the Genghis (""great"") Khan of the Mongols.  Source = MET Timeline"							EVENT												Tamerlane	0.63		"ca. 1370–1507 Timur (Tamerlane, r. 1370–1405), a Barlas Turk married to a Mongolian princess, establishes rule in Central Asia and expands westward, gaining control over most of West Asia. At his capital at Samarqand, Timur initiates one of the most brilliant periods in Islamic art.  Source = MET Timeline"								Kublai Khan	0.74		Kublai Khan ascends to the Mongol throne in 1264 and moves the capital from Karakorum to Beijing.  Source = MET Timeline.																		Generalized China	block	150	208/217/215									TOP	0		0								Republic	0.088		"A republic evolves amidst warlordism and conflicts between the Nationalist and the Communist parties. After World War II, the Communists prevail and establish the People's Republic of China.  Source = MET Timeline."								"Yuan, Ming and Qing Dynasties"	0.721		"Kublai Khan moves Mongol capital to Beijing. In 1271, he chooses the Chinese name Yuan (""original"" or ""prime"") for his dynasty, and by 1279 all of China has fallen."								"Sui, Tang and Song Dynasties"	1.419		"Sui Dynasty (581-618 AD), then Tang Dynasty (618-906 AD) of golden age for China with a vast trading empire and Silk Road.  Source = MET Timeline, and golden comments from 1421 by Gavin Menzies."								-	1.78		Three Kingdoms (220-265 AD; Sixteen Kingdoms (N.China; 304-439 AD).  Source = MET Timeline.								Qin (Chin) and Han Dynasties	2.221		"Qin is pronounced ""Chin"", which is origin of ""China"" term.  Boundaries established by Qin essentially define today's China.  Source = MET Timeline"								-	2.475		Warring States Period								Shang and Zhou Dynasties	3.6		"Henan Province emerged as the center of the most advanced and literate cultures of the time and became the seat of the political and military power of the Shang dynasty (ca. 1600–1050 B.C.), the earliest archaeologically recorded dynasty in Chinese history.  Source = MET Timeline."								Top	4.1		"Top of the Longshan (""Towards the end of the 3rd millennium BC (2100 used here), the population decreased sharply in most of the region and many of the larger centres were abandoned, possibly due to environmental change linked to the end of the Holocene Climatic Optimum.[49]"" (Wikipedia entry for Longshan culture)"								Longshan	4.35		"Longshan Culture dates back to 4350~3950 years ago and derived its name from the place of discovery - Chengziya Ruins, Longshan Town, Zhangqiu, Shandong Province. (http://history.cultural-china.com/en/51History601.html).  Shared stylistic attributes over a wide area suggest increased inter-regional interaction by the late Neolithic period. There is a variety of pottery forms, with the majority dark grey or black in colour. Common decoration techniques are polishing and cord mark impressions. Finely made vessels in burials become extremely thin walled. Ground stone and chipped stone tools for agriculture and wood working appear similar to those from earlier periods. Symbolic jade forms in burials continue to be important. Traces of copper or bronze at a few sites indicate the beginnings of metallurgy. At most sites, houses are circular, built at ground level, and have walls of wattle-and-daub.  Adobe brick and hang tu (or rammed earth) begin to see use in this period. There is evidence for settlement hierarchies in more than one area. Follows the Yangshao tradition in the central Huang He or Yellow River valley, the Dawenkou tradition in the lower Yellow river valley, the Daxi tradition in the central Yangzi river valley. It precedes the Shang tradition the historic period."								Southeast China Late Neolithic	5.5		"Well developed stamped geometric patterns on ceramics. Double-shouldered stone tools. In some areas, large polished stone shoves buried in pits without associated material. Generally small sites and houses. Follows the Southeast China Early Neolithic tradition, precedes the historic period. "								Dawenkou	6.2		"A variety of pottery forms, especially in burials, such as tall stemmed cups, serving stands, tripod cooking pots, tripod pitchers, and jars. Decorative techniques include polishing, engraving open work design on stems, and embellishment of form (thin walls, tall stems). A few painted vessels have been found, primarily from the early phase. Ground stone agricultural and woodworking tools, jade ornaments, and symbolic jade tools (apparently unused) in burials. Rectangular and circular houses (mainly ground level, some subterranean), primarily wattle-and-daub. There is little information on settlement patterns. Follows the Peiligang tradition, precedes the Longshan tradition. "								"Peilingang, Yangshao, Hongshan, Daxi, Majiabang"	8.5	dashed	"Materials commonly found on Peiligang sites include red and brown slipped handmade ceramics fired at low temperature; a diversity of ground stone tools, including axes, hoes, serrated scythes, and distinctive  four footed mortars; microlithic blade tools; and a variety of bone tools, including arrows and harpoons armed with bone points. Follows the Ordosian tradition, precedes the Yangshao and Dawenkou traditions."								Southeast China Early Neolithic (Dapenkeng)	9	dashed	"Thick, grit tempered, cord-marked ceramics, often with incised geometric designs around the rim. Pebble choppers and flake knives and scrapers. Ground stone adzes, axes, scythes, hoes, and grinding slabs. Follows the Ordosian tradition, precedes the Southeast China Late Neolithic tradition."								Ordosian	40	dashed	"Small stone tools made from flakes by hard hammer direct percussion predominate. Tool kits are variable in composition and include simple flakes, scrapes, notches, denticules, points, borers, backed knives, burins, and bone tools. From about 20,000 B.P., blades are an important component, and mircolithic technology is well established throughout the region by 10,000 B.P. Other than cultural remains from caves and rock shelters, hunter gatherers of this tradition are not associated with substantial Paleolithic dwellings.  Encompasses the Upper Paleolithic and the Pleistocene/Holocene transition. Follows the East Asian Middle Paleolithic tradition and precedes the Peiligang tradition. More than one chronometric date is reported for the Ordosian sites. Most of these dates were obtained more than 20 years ago before new quantitative techniques were refined to the point they are today. Because it is now possible to date some loess sediments, the chronology of the Chinese Paleolithic in this region is currently in a dynamic state. "																													North China	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	0										Republic	0.088		"A republic evolves amidst warlordism and conflicts between the Nationalist and the Communist parties. After World War II, the Communists prevail and establish the People's Republic of China.  Source = MET Timeline."								Qing dynasty	0.38										Ming dynasty	0.632		The establishment of the Ming dynasty in 1368 marks the return of native rule over all of China for the first time in centuries.   Source = MET Timeline.								Mongol (Yuan)	0.767										Jin dynasty	0.875										Liao dynasty	1.094										Sui and Tang Dynasties	1.419		"Sui Dynasty (581-618 AD), then Tang Dynasty (618-906 AD) of golden age for China with a vast trading empire and Silk Road.  Source = MET Timeline, and golden comments from 1421 by Gavin Menzies."								-	1.48		"Economic pressures, internal strife, and other factors contribute to the dissolution of the powerful Northern Wei empire. Source = MET Timeline."								Wei dynasty	1.614										-	1.78		Three Kingdoms (220-265 AD; Sixteen Kingdoms (N.China; 304-439 AD).  Source = MET Timeline.								Han Dynasty	2.206		Han dynasty is divided into two major periods: the Western [capital] or Former Han (206 B.C.–9 A.D.) and the Eastern [capital] or Later Han (25–220 A.D.).  Source = MET Timeline								Qin (Chin) Dynasty	2.221		"Qin is pronounced ""Chin"", which is origin of ""China"" term.  Boundaries established by Qin essentially define today's China.  Source = MET Timeline"								Warring States Period	2.475		Warring States Period								Zhou Dynasty	3.046		"Western Zhou 1046-771 BC; then move of capital to Luoyang in Henan Province begins Eastern Zhou 771-256 BC. (Spring and Autumn period, 770-475 BC; then Warring States period, 475-221 BC).  Source = MET Timeline"								Shang Dynasty	3.6		"Henan Province emerged as the center of the most advanced and literate cultures of the time and became the seat of the political and military power of the Shang dynasty (ca. 1600–1050 B.C.), the earliest archaeologically recorded dynasty in Chinese history.  Source = MET Timeline."								Top	4.1		"Top of the Longshan (""Towards the end of the 3rd millennium BC (2100 used here), the population decreased sharply in most of the region and many of the larger centres were abandoned, possibly due to environmental change linked to the end of the Holocene Climatic Optimum.[49]"" (Wikipedia entry for Longshan culture)"								Longshan	4.35		"Longshan Culture dates back to 4350~3950 years ago and derived its name from the place of discovery - Chengziya Ruins, Longshan Town, Zhangqiu, Shandong Province. (http://history.cultural-china.com/en/51History601.html).  Shared stylistic attributes over a wide area suggest increased inter-regional interaction by the late Neolithic period. There is a variety of pottery forms, with the majority dark grey or black in colour. Common decoration techniques are polishing and cord mark impressions. Finely made vessels in burials become extremely thin walled. Ground stone and chipped stone tools for agriculture and wood working appear similar to those from earlier periods. Symbolic jade forms in burials continue to be important. Traces of copper or bronze at a few sites indicate the beginnings of metallurgy. At most sites, houses are circular, built at ground level, and have walls of wattle-and-daub.  Adobe brick and hang tu (or rammed earth) begin to see use in this period. There is evidence for settlement hierarchies in more than one area. Follows the Yangshao tradition in the central Huang He or Yellow River valley, the Dawenkou tradition in the lower Yellow river valley, the Daxi tradition in the central Yangzi river valley. It precedes the Shang tradition the historic period."								TOP	4.5		Top of the Honshan and Yangshao								Honshan	7		"Jade ornaments in the form of birds, turtles, clouds, insects, and other naturalistic and geomentric shapes are the most notable artefacts. Large, rock-piled tombs, ceremonial centres, large and small representational statuary of human females and animals are also unique to Hongstan. Both black-on-red painted pottery with curvillinear designs and impressed or incised brown pottery, especially with zigzag or rocker stamping, are characteristic of the culture. Stone tools are chipped or ground and include plows, hoes, grinding stones, small projectile points, and rectangular knives. Follows the Peiligang and precedes the Longshan traditions."								Yangshao	7		"Yanshao: Black on red painted pottery with zoomorphic and geomorphic designs. Fine clay curving-bellied bowls and basins, small mouthed V-bottomed vases. Semisubterranean or surface hatched houses built with wattle-and-daub method. Settlements desplay plans with public courtyard, dwelling area, and graveyard. Storage pits are filled with greyish cultural deposit. Follows the Peiligang and precedes the Longshan tradition."								TOP	8.5	dashed	Top of the Ordosian								Ordosian	40	dashed	"Small stone tools made from flakes by hard hammer direct percussion predominate. Tool kits are variable in composition and include simple flakes, scrapes, notches, denticules, points, borers, backed knives, burins, and bone tools. From about 20,000 B.P., blades are an important component, and mircolithic technology is well established throughout the region by 10,000 B.P. Other than cultural remains from caves and rock shelters, hunter gatherers of this tradition are not associated with substantial Paleolithic dwellings.  Encompasses the Upper Paleolithic and the Pleistocene/Holocene transition. Follows the East Asian Middle Paleolithic tradition and precedes the Peiligang tradition. More than one chronometric date is reported for the Ordosian sites. Most of these dates were obtained more than 20 years ago before new quantitative techniques were refined to the point they are today. Because it is now possible to date some loess sediments, the chronology of the Chinese Paleolithic in this region is currently in a dynamic state. "																		South China	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	0										Republic	0.088		"A republic evolves amidst warlordism and conflicts between the Nationalist and the Communist parties. After World War II, the Communists prevail and establish the People's Republic of China.  Source = MET Timeline."								Qing dynasty	0.356										Ming dynasty	0.632		The establishment of the Ming dynasty in 1368 marks the return of native rule over all of China for the first time in centuries.   Source = MET Timeline.								Mongol (Yuan)	0.721										Song dynasty	1.04										TOP	1.094										Sui and Tang Dynasties	1.419		"Sui Dynasty (581-618 AD), then Tang Dynasty (618-906 AD) of golden age for China with a vast trading empire and Silk Road.  Source = MET Timeline, and golden comments from 1421 by Gavin Menzies."								"Jin, Song, Qi, Liang, Chen dynasties"	1.683										-	1.78		Three Kingdoms (220-265 AD; Sixteen Kingdoms (N.China; 304-439 AD).  Source = MET Timeline.								Han Dynasty	2.206		Han dynasty is divided into two major periods: the Western [capital] or Former Han (206 B.C.–9 A.D.) and the Eastern [capital] or Later Han (25–220 A.D.).  Source = MET Timeline								Qin (Chin) Dynasty	2.221		"Qin is pronounced ""Chin"", which is origin of ""China"" term.  Boundaries established by Qin essentially define today's China.  Source = MET Timeline"								Warring States Period	2.475		Warring States Period								Zhou  Dynasty	3.046		"Western Zhou 1046-771 BC; then move of capital to Luoyang in Henan Province begins Eastern Zhou 771-256 BC. (Spring and Autumn period, 770-475 BC; then Warring States period, 475-221 BC).  Source = MET Timeline"								Shang Dynasty	3.6		"Henan Province emerged as the center of the most advanced and literate cultures of the time and became the seat of the political and military power of the Shang dynasty (ca. 1600–1050 B.C.), the earliest archaeologically recorded dynasty in Chinese history.  Source = MET Timeline."								Xia Dynasty?	4.1		"The unconfirmed ""Xia dynasty (ca. 2100–1600 B.C.) is cited in early histories as the first power to emerge in China.""  Center may have been in Henan Province. Source = MET Timeline"								Southeast China Late Neolithic	5.5		"Well developed stamped geometric patterns on ceramics. Double-shouldered stone tools. In some areas, large polished stone shoves buried in pits without associated material. Generally small sites and houses. Follows the Southeast China Early Neolithic tradition, precedes the historic period. "								Southeast China Early Neolithic (Dapenkeng)	9	dashed	"Thick, grit tempered, cord-marked ceramics, often with incised geometric designs around the rim. Pebble choppers and flake knives and scrapers. Ground stone adzes, axes, scythes, hoes, and grinding slabs. Follows the Ordosian tradition, precedes the Southeast China Late Neolithic tradition."								Eastern Central Asia Palaeolithic 	40	dashed	"Crude pebble core and flake tools, Lavallois core and flake tools, some blade cores and tools. Primary tool forms include scrappers and retouched flakes. Follows the East Asian Middle Palaeolithic tradition, precedes the Eastern Central Asia Neolithic and Bronze Age tradition. "																		Central China	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	1.5		Top of the Eastern Central Asia Neolithic and Bronze								TOP	2.5		Top of the Late Xiajiadian (Xiajiadian Shangceng) and the Southeast China Late Neolithic								Late Xiajiadian (Xiajiadian Shangceng)	3.6		"Bronze artefacts such as knives, daggers, and decorative plaques are the best known late Xiajiadian objects. Li and ding tripods and pedestal-leg dou vessels dominate the ceramic assembly. The firing temperatureof these vessels was probably low, producing soft, crumbly ceramics with a nonhomogenuous colour. Investment in permanent domestic structures is usually minimal. More energy is invested in the construction of graves, which are usually earthen pits lined with stone slabs. Preceded by the Lower Xianjiadian tradition and followed by the historic period. "								Eastern Central Asia Neolithic and Bronze	6		"Frequent, although not universal, are microlithic tools, often manufactured from small conical cores producing pointed blades; coarse grey and red wares ceramics as well as painted ceramics, often red slipped  with black or red geometric designs, handles, and round to pointed bases; after about 3000 B.P., axes, knives, and other items of bronze become common. Follows the Eastern Central Asia Palaeolithic,  precedes the historic period"								Top	6.2		Top of the Peilingang (central)								Peilingang (central)	8.5		"Materials commonly found on Peiligang sites include red and brown slipped handmade ceramics fired at low temperature; a diversity of ground stone tools, including axes, hoes, serrated scythes, and distinctive  four footed mortars; microlithic blade tools; and a variety of bone tools, including arrows and harpoons armed with bone points. Follows the Ordosian tradition, precedes the Yangshao and Dawenkou traditions."																		China events	event		208/217/215	notitle	off						FAD												Mao Zedong wins civil war	0.051										Mongol (Kublai Khan)	0.721		"Kublai Khan moves Mongol capital to Beijing. In 1271, he chooses the Chinese name Yuan (""original"" or ""prime"") for his dynasty, and by 1279 all of China has fallen."								Qin Shihuangdi	2.221		"Qin Shihuangdi extend Chinese rule as far south as Vietnam. His administered prefectures under a huge central bureaucracy served in China until the collapse of the Qing dynasty in 1911. Qin Shihuangdi standardized the Chinese script, currency, and system of measurement; expanded the network of roads and canals; and built the Great Wall. Source = MET TImeline"								Grand Canal	2.486		Grand Canal begun by Zhou (Wu) dynasty in 486 BC.  Extended Hangzhou-Beijing (1800 km) in 584 AD onwards; then improved during Ming dynasty (1411 AD) to support building of Forbidden City.  Source = 1421 by Gavin Menzies								Zhou people conquest	3.046		"The Shang dynasty was conquered by the people of Zhou, who came from farther up the Yellow River in the area of Xi'an in Shaanxi Province."								"Painted ceramics, Hemudu"	7										Small agricultural villages	8.5	 								LAD												Xinhai Revolution	0.088		"In 1215, Genghis Khan captures Beijing, and in 1233, the southern capital of the Jin dynasty at Kaifeng surrenders.  Source = MET Timeline."								Manchu invasion	0.38		"1125 AD The Jurchen of eastern Manchuria conquer Liao territories and move south into northern China, capturing the capital at Kaifeng (formerly Bianliang) and forcing the Song court south.  Source = MET TImeline"								Last Mongol emperor flees	0.632		Qin Shihuangdi is credited with building the Great Wall of China by uniting several preexisting defensive walls on the northern frontier.  Source = MET TImeline								Mongol (Genghis Khan) conquest	0.767		Confucius 551-479 BC								Manchurian conquest	0.875		"The move of the capital east to Luoyang in Henan Province, after the invasion of the nomadic Quanrong, marks the beginning of the Eastern Zhou era.  Source = MET Timeline."							EVENT												Opium War	0.16		"1911 Dr. Sun Yat-sen (1866–1925) leads the Xinhai Revolution that topples the Qing dynasty, ending 5,000 years of imperial rule.  Source = MET Timeline."								Forbidden City completed	0.579		"Emperor Daoguang stops opium traffic by  British East India Company, prompting Britain's attack1840–42 of the Opium War.  Treaty of Nanjing, which opens new ports and Hong Kong becomes a British colony.  Source = MET Timeline"								Indian Ocean Expeditions	0.595		"1620 Nurhachi (1559–1616) establishes the Manchu Jin dynasty in the northeast. His son changes the name to Qing, the dynasty under which the Manchus control all of China. His grandson is the first Manchu emperor under the name Shunzhi (r. 1644–1661). Source = MET Timeline."								Great Wall	2.21		"Zhu Di, 3rd Ming Emperor, inaugarates Forbidden City on site of former Mongol royal enclosure.  This first wooden one burned a few years later, and was replaced in stone."								Confucius	2.5		"Seven grand naval expeditions, some totaling 300 ships and 27,000 sailors, reach India, Persia and Africa (and further?)."								Nomadic Quanrong invasion	2.771		"Last Mongol emperor (Tonghon Temur) flees; Zhu yuanshang proclaims Ming dynasty, taking title of Hong Wu.  Source = 1421 by Gavin Menzies"																													Japan intervals	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	0.132		"Top of the Feudal (Edo, Tokugawa)"								"Feudal (Edo, Tokugawa)"	0.397										TOP	1.5		Top of the Yayoi								Yayoi	2.5		"Flat-bottomed ceramics typically with very narrow bases and in distinctive forms; rice agriculture and associated utensils including ground-stone reaping blades, wooden shovels, and chipped-stone hoes; distinctive bronze items including bells, sword and spear points. Follows the Jamon tradition and continues into the historic period. "								Jomon (Final)	3										Jomon (Late)	3.5										Jomon (IMiddle)	4.5										Jomon (Early)	7										Jomon (Initial) 	10										Jomon (Incipient) 	12	dashed	"The term ""Jomon"" (cord mask) is derived from typical pottery decoration of this period. This term is used both as the name of the time period and culture as well as of the pottery used in this period. Typical materials found on Jomon sites include Jomon pottery , clay figurines, clay masks, pendants, antler harpoons, and spears. "								Japanese Late Paleolithic (Sendokian)	20		"Blade debitage cores, Setouchi technique cores, burins on truncation with retouched base (Araya type), burins on inverse truncation (Kamiyama type), backed points with retouched base, flake points with retouched blade. "																													Southeast Asia - Mainland	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	1.5		"Top of the Island Southeast Asia Late Prehistoric (Indo-Malasyaian Archipelago Early Metal Phase, Sa Huynh-Kalanay) and Mainland Southeast Asia Late Prehistoric"								Mainland Southeast Asia Late Prehistoric	2.5		"This period is considered the interface between the late prehistoric and early historic periods and is sometimes called the Protohistoric period. Complex polities emerged during this time along the coasts and in the river valleys of mainland Southeast Asia, and it is also likely that many subsistence strategies like hunting and gathering continued into this period. At its early end (2500 – 1500 B.P.), some archaeologists have also called this period the “Iron Age” “General Period C” and the “High Metal Age”. The period after A.D. 200 falls into Higham's “General Period D” and at the beginning of the regionally specific chronologies. In central Burma, we see the initiation of the Pyu period, and in central Thailand we see the origins of the Dvaravati period. In the Khorat Plateau/Tonle Sap region, the founding of the Khmer empire signals the end of this period in A.D. 802. In Vietnam, this is a transitional phase between Bronze Age complex societies and the earliest states. The period from 2500 – 1500 is glossed over as “the early historic period”.    Encyclopedia of Prehistory, Vol. 3 p. 160-162   "								TOP	4		Top of the Hoabinhian								Hoabinhian	10		"Definition of the Hoabinhian assemblages included unifacially flaked pebble tools, particularly ""sumatraliths"" an elongated oval pebble with flakes removed from one of its faces, and a short axe, which made of flat and oval pebbles of flakes, flaked only on one face, and broken into into halves. Along with diagnostic unifacial pebble and flake tools, Hoabinhian assemblages also included unifacial flaked tools, edge-ground stones, large flakes, untilised flakes, a large amount of debitages, and cord-marked ceramics.  However, bone and shell tools are reported from a number of Hoabinhian sites. Settlement patterns include cave, rock shelters, and shell middens. Follows the Southeast Asia Upper Palaeolithic tradition and precedes the Southeast Asia Neolithic and Bronze Age tradition. "								Southeast Asia Upper Palaeolithic	40		"Between 40,000 and 30,000 B.P., unifacial pebble tools and utilised flakes (generally of scraper-like morphology when retouched), as well as bone tools of various types, seem to characterised most Southeast Asian assemblages. On the Asian mainland, there is a predominance of tools made from volcanic and metamorphic river pebbles. In the islands, there was much greater availability of findgrained rocks such as chert. Some regions lacked good stone, and the resulting industries are essentially without regular form. Core preparation for elongated flakes is claimed before 17,000 B.P., there is an industry of elongated backed flakes, microliths, and hollow based projectile points dating to the mid-Holocene after 700 B.P. The open site of Tingkayu (possibly 28,000 – 17,000 B.P.) in Sabah has an industry, so far unique in Southeast Asia, of chert bifaces. Less standardised bifacial working in chert was also present more than 25,000 years ago in rock shelters in Southern Thailand. In general Southeast Asia in this period has a lack of stone spear points or knives and an overall lack of tools demonstrating purposeful thinning and retouch flaking. Prismatic blade technology appears only in Neolithic, uniquely so far at the site of Bukit Tengkorak in Sabah, were it dates to 3500 B.P. Nevertheless, two technological innovations of considerable significance were made during the Late Pleistocene. These are the edge grinding of pebble axe, reported widely but of variable date in Vietnam, Peninsular Malaysia ans Sarawak (the oldest ones could date to 30,000 years ago as in Japan and Australia), and the manufacture of large shell adzes, reported from about 13,000 B.P. in the northern Moluccas. Follows the East Asian Middle Palaeolithic tradition, precedes the Hoabinhian tradition on the Southeast Asian Mainland and northern Sumatra and the Island Southeast Asian Neolithic tradition in the islands."								TOP	200		Top of the Zhoukoudian								Zhoukoudian	600		"Locality 1 has produced a sequence of deposits 40m thick, rich in both artefacts and fossils. The fossil remains of more than 40 individuals attributed to Homo erectus include 14 partial crania, as well as many teeth and postcranial elements. Artefacts are made of vein quartz and consist mostly of flakes. Anvils and bipolar flakes and cores were fashioned by retouching along edges of quartz chunks or flakes produced primarily scraper forms, as well as forms classified as choppers, points, and awls. First tradition in East Asia; precedes the East Asian Middle Palaeolithic "																		Korea sub-interval	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	2.5		Top of the Mumun								Mumun	4		"Coarse pottery with little or no surface decoration, flat based, handmade, and low-fired. Polished stone implements. Bronze daggers of Machurian or Liaoning type. Megalithic structures (dolmens), stone cists, and jar burials. Semisubterranean houses with rectangular, square, and circular floor plans often in large groups. Follows the Chulmun tradition, precedes the historic period. In Korean literatures, generally referred to as the Bronze Age of Korea. "								"Chulumn (Pissalmun, Comb-Pattern)"	8		"Coiled pottery jars with wide mouths, decorated on the exterior with incising, impressing, appliqué, or pinching. Chipped and ground stone tools often made of slate. Subrectangular, semi-subterranean houses with a square central hearth. Houses are grouped in small villages. which tend to cluster on streams, coasts, and islands. Sites on the coast are often associated with shell mounds. Follows the Ordosian tradition and precedes the Mumun tradition. "																		Indo-Malaysia	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	0										"Island Southeast Asia Late Prehistoric (Indo-Malasyaian Archipelago Early Metal Phase, Sa Huynh-Kalanay)"	2.5		"Decorated pottery, predominately incised, assigned to the Sa Huynh-Kalanay tradition. Large and small jars, bowls, boxes, plates, and cups, with high necked vases as a distinctive widespread form that transcended local traditions. Ceremonial bronzes with geometrical and stylized figureative motifs, including gongs (called bells and kettle drums in literature), axes, and flasks. Glass beads of the Indonesian Pacific variety, plus semiprecious stone beads imported from India. Boats made out of sewn planks lashed directly to the frame. Wooden housing on piles can be assumed despite spotty support from the archaeological evidence. Follows the Southeast Asian Neolithic and Early Bronze, precedes historic."								Southeast Asia Neolithic and Bronze	6.5		"Generally characterised by pottery and polished stone tools, with some “Bronze Age” qualities, with some continuing “Mesolithic” flaked stone tools industries in remote regions. The region is so vast that a simple summary is not possible. Bronze artefacts during this period were restricted to northerly parts of the mainland of Southeast Asia and made an initial appearance c. 3500 B.P. Technologies everywhere reflected adaptation to tropical conditions, particularly in the use of organic materials such as wood and bamboo. Follows the South-east Asia Upper Palaeolithic and Hoabinhian traditions, precedes the South east Asia Late Prehistoric traditions Many hunter-gatherer economies continues in isolated regions during this period, especially in Island South-east Asia. This period also encompassed the primary dispersal of two major agriculturalist  populations: speakers of the Austroasiatic languages on the Mainland South-east Asia, and the speakers of the Austronesian languages in the Philippine and Indonesian islands"																		Australia intervals	block	150	197/217/234		off							TOP	0.2		Top of the Late Australian								Late Australian	7		"Backed artefacts, points, tulas, axes (in the south), millstones, earth mounds, shell mounds, stone structures, complex polychrome art, and high density cemeteries. Follows Early Australian, precedes the historic period. "								Early Australian	40		Precedes Late Austrian																													Australia event	event		197/217/234		off						FAD												Australian Core Tool and Scraper Tradition	32		Lake Mungo sites (from Archeology Dictionary site)																		Oceania - Micronesia	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	0.2										Micronesian	3		"All prehistoric human material fall into the Micronesian tradition, as these were the first human inhabitants of the islands."								Lapita	3.5		"The Lapita peoples lived on the islands of Melanesia and Western Polynesia, where they favoured the coastal interface between land and sea, building their settlements on either beach or terraces or on stilt houses situated over reef flats or shallow lagoons.  The Lapita people extensively exploited the rich marine resources of reefs, lagoons and open sea as a primary source of food, while they used the jungle for its rich plant life and for planting gardens.  The oldest radiocarbon dates thus far obtained come from sites in the Bismarck archipelago, especially the Mussau islands, and are about 3500  - 3400 calibrated B.P. These earliest sites constitute what is sometimes called the “Early Far Western” subtradition of major expansion of Lapita. Between about 3200-2900 B.P., there was a Western region (Bismarck and main Solomons), into Remote Oceania. No later than 2900 – 2800 B.P., Lapita had reached its maximum geographic distribution, with the most easterly known sites in the Manu'a islands of Samoa, and the most southerly on the New Caledonia. Terminal dates for the Lapita tradition vary in different localities. In the Bismarck archipelago, distinctively new styles of ceramic decoration commence by around 2700 – 2300 B.P., although there is probably cultural continuity. In the Western Polynesian region, the distinctive dentate-stamped ceramic style does not persist for more than two or three centuries, giving way to variants of Polynesian plainware by 2500 B.P. "																		Oceania - Polynesia	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	0.4		Top of the Rapanui or Rapa Nui								Rapanui or Rapa Nui	1.5		"Stylised monolithic stone sculpture (moai) in human form associated with distinctive ceremonial architecture (ahu). Elliptical houses (hare paenga) of pole and thatch with dressed curbstone foundations and associated beach cobble pavements. Flat obsidian spearheads (mata'a) of various sizes and some named shapes, each with percussion-flaked tang, and one-piece fishhooks (mangai) of bone and stone.  "								Polynesian expansion	2		"Lapita ceramics are replaced by Polynesian plainware ceramics, which in turn disappear but are not replaced. Thus the presences of ceramics is a key material indicator of the early part of the tradition and their absence of the later part. Monumental burial and substructure mounds and earthwork fortifications are also diagnostic of the later part of this tradition. "								Somoan	2.5		"Lapita ceramics are replaced by Polynesian plainware ceramics, which in turn disappear but are not replaced. Thus the presences of ceramics is a key material indicator of the early part of the tradition and their absence of the later part. Ground stone adzes, flaked stone tools, and shell tools are also characteristic of the tradition. Follows the Lapita colonization of the Samoan islands and contines into the historic period."																		Oceania - Melanesia	block	150	208/217/215		off							TOP	0.9		Top of the Fijian								Fijian	2.4		"Impressed ceramics until roughly 900B.P., incised ceramics thereafter. Stone adze blades and other stone tools. Earthwork fortifications are a major feature of the landscape in many parts of Fiji. Follows the initial Lapita colonisation of the Fiji islands, continues into the historic period. "								Melanesian	2.5		"The absence of Lapita pottery is a prime diagnostic feature of the Melanesian tradition, and pottery of the Melanesian tradition itself is both rare and diverse , so that it does not form a good diagnostic category. Large, well made stone axes or adzes have been found, but most other tools made of bone, shell or wood have not been preserved. Obsidian blades were used in some areas. Follows the Early Australian and Lapita traditions, precedes the historic  period. "								Lapita	3.5		"The Lapita peoples lived on the islands of Melanesia and Western Polynesia, where they favoured the coastal interface between land and sea, building their settlements on either beach or terraces or on stilt houses situated over reef flats or shallow lagoons.  The Lapita people extensively exploited the rich marine resources of reefs, lagoons and open sea as a primary source of food, while they used the jungle for its rich plant life and for planting gardens.  The oldest radiocarbon dates thus far obtained come from sites in the Bismarck archipelago, especially the Mussau islands, and are about 3500  - 3400 calibrated B.P. These earliest sites constitute what is sometimes called the “Early Far Western” subtradition of major expansion of Lapita. Between about 3200-2900 B.P., there was a Western region (Bismarck and main Solomons), into Remote Oceania. No later than 2900 – 2800 B.P., Lapita had reached its maximum geographic distribution, with the most easterly known sites in the Manu'a islands of Samoa, and the most southerly on the New Caledonia. Terminal dates for the Lapita tradition vary in different localities. In the Bismarck archipelago, distinctively new styles of ceramic decoration commence by around 2700 – 2300 B.P., although there is probably cultural continuity. In the Western Polynesian region, the distinctive dentate-stamped ceramic style does not persist for more than two or three centuries, giving way to variants of Polynesian plainware by 2500 B.P. "								Mumum (New Guinea)	4		"Coarse pottery with little or no surface decoration, flat based, handmade, and low-fired. Polished stone implements. Bronze daggers of Machurian or Liaoning type. Megalithic structures (dolmens), stone cists, and jar burials. Semisubterranean houses with rectangular, square, and circular floor plans often in large groups. Follows the Chulmun tradition, precedes the historic period. In Korean literatures, generally referred to as the Bronze Age of Korea. "								New Guinea Neolithic	10		"The New Guinea Neolithic peoples were the first food producers and had the first sedentary communities in New Guinea; thus, major diagnostic features are the presence of agricultural fields and sedentary communities. Crude flaked stone tools, including retouched flakes, bifaces, and pebble tools become an important feature of the tool kit over time. Follows the Early Australian tradition, precedes the historic period. It should be noted that this entry focuses on the highlands, which were occupied for at least 25,000 years.  The coastal areas show little occupation until roughly 4,000 B.P. and demonstrate some cultural features quite different from the highlands. For coastal areas, readers should consult the Melanesian entry. "																		Oceania migrations	event		197/217/234		off						FAD												Hawaiian	0.8		"Begins with the initial colonisation of the Hawaiian islands and precedes European contact in A.D. 1778 Bone and shell fishhooks, dry-laid stone temple mounds. Settlement patterns include dispersed residences within a series of topographic land boundaries with some major population and ceremonial centers. "								Maori	0.9		"Begins with the first colonization of New Zealand by Polynesians and precedes the historic period. Stone adzes, personal ornaments of jade bone, and shell, fishhooks of bone and shell, wooden artefacts including house timbers with figurative and curvilinear decorative carving. Rectangular houses. Earthwork fortifications "								Tahitian	1.4		"From the first settlement of the Society islands to the historic period. Includes all items of human manufacture before European contact. Most common are tanged stone adzes and shell fishhooks. Personal ornaments of bone, ivory, and pearl shell are also important. "								Easter Island	1.5		Begin with the initial colonisation of Rapanui and precedes European contact. 								Marquesan	1.7		"Begins with initial human colonization of the Marquessa, precedes the historic period. Basalt adzes and food pounders, pearl-shell fishhooks and ornaments, whale tooth pendants, bone harpoon points. Stone house foundations, large terraced dance ground, massive stone tiki (anthropomorphic images). "								"Tongan, Samoan"	2		Follows the Lapita colonization of the Tongan islands and contines into the historic period.								Micronesian arrival	3		The first inhabitants of Micronesia; precedes the historic period.							LAD												Marquesan	0.175										"Hawaiian, Maori, Tahitian, Tongan"	0.2										Easter Island	0.4																															Europe	:	Generalized Europe ages	Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine)	Central (Austria to Poland)	S France-Iberia (West Central)	Western/West-Central Europe	British Isles - NW France 	British Isles - NW France sub-intervals	European - Northeast	European - Scandinavia	Caucasian steppes to South Siberia											Generalized Europe ages	block	150	246/177/202									TOP	0										Industrial Age	0.2										Renaissance	0.515										Medieval	1.5										Dark Ages	1.676		Constantine comes to power in AD 324. Source = MET Timeline								Roman	2.1										Celtic	2.5										Iron Age	2.8										Bronze Age	5.1										Chalcolithic (Copper Age)	6.5										Neolithic	8										Mesolithic	11		Retreat of glacial ice.  Transition between hunter-gatherer and development of farming and pottery.  Source = Archeology dictionary.								Gravettian Culture	30		"An Upper Paleolithic industry named after the site of La Gravette in Southwest France. It is characterized by blade tools called Gravette points (small, pointed blades with straight blunted backs) and female figurines made of ivory. This industry succeeded the Aurignacian and preceeded the Solutrian, c. 28,000-20,000BP. It appears to have developed in central Europe, eventually expanding east and west. The Gravettians invented the bow and arrow, blunted-back knives, and tanged arrowheads. Other common artifacts belonging to the Gravettians are bone and ivory spears, as well as bone tools incised with elaborate geometric patterns."								Late Paleolithic	40		Stone and flint tools (with heavy marginal retouch).  Named after Aurignac site in S. France.								Mousterian  (Homo neanderthalensis)	180		"Archeology dictionary (but WebChron says only 100,000 BP for onset).  Lasted until about 30,000 BP. Also called the Middle Paleolithic. The Mousterian industry was an advancement over the Levallois technique. It used a disc shaped core from which flakes could be struck and then reworked into tools. More flakes could be produced from a single core than in previous industries. (Physical Anth Book)"																		Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine)	:	Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine) - eastern 	Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine) - southeastern 	Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine) -  northern																		Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine) - eastern 	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0.547		Fall of Constantipole 1453 AD = end of Byzantine Empire. Source = MET Timeline								Byzantium	1.676		Constantine comes to power in AD 324. Source = MET Timeline								Roman Iron Age	2.1										TOP	4		"Top of the Eurasian Steppe Nomad (Yamnaya, Katacombnaya)"								"Eurasian Steppe Nomad (Yamnaya, Katacombnaya)"	6.5		"The construction of kurgan mounds over the burial; the construction of burial grounds with stone foundations and cromlechs. The dead were buried individually in quadrangular pits roofed with wooden floors; the position of the dead is supine in contracted posture with the legs raised; the orientation is predominantly eastern; various uses of ochre in the burial rite. The funeral offerings: eggshaped and pointed bottom vessels with a short neck, ornamented with single and double cord impressions, comb impressions; bronze four faceted awls and leaf-shaped knives made of North Caucasus metal; upper quern stones and millstones; pendants made of animal fangs, bone hammer-shaped pins; wooden wagons; anthropomorphic stelae in the western region. Short-term camp sites in the east and permanent settlements in the west. Follows the Eastern European Mesolithic tradition and precedes the Scythian tradition. "								 Eastern European Mesolithic (Epipaleolithic)	11		"The technique of chipping knife-shaped blades, including microblades, was highly developed. Microblades had a variety of geometrical shapes, such as segmented, trapezoidal, rectangular, and parallelogram forms. Microburins were used for producing microliths. Wood-working tools were widely used and included axes, adzes, chisels, and macrolithic specialised tools such as mattocks, picks and hoes. Polishing of stone tools, drilling and sawing were also employed. Bone and antler tools were harpoons, arrows, darts, daggers, knives, spears, axes, adzes and sockets for them. Follows the Cyesar Paleolithic and precedes many of the Neolithic traditions in Central and Eastern Europe. "								Magdalenian	18		"A  distinctive set of typologically defined tools, based on prepared core blade production, including numerous blacked bladelets, dihedra burins, burins on truncation, end-scrapers on blades, percoirs, and becs. An elaborate bone tool technology, including beveled sagaie bone points, single and double row barbed harpoons, and eyed needles. Production of mobiliary art on utilitarian and non-utilitarian objects, including animal, human and geometric motifs, and parietal art, including many of the celebrated painted caves of Southwestern France. Top of the Northern Mediterranean Mesolithic (Epipaleolithic), in some places to c.6500 B.P. Last tradition of the European Upper Paleolithic, follows the Solutrean tradition, precedes the Mesolithic tradition of Europe."								Aurignacian	40		"Stone and flint tools (with heavy marginal retouch).  Named after Aurignac site in S. France. The Aurignacian people are the first modern humans in Europe. In addition to the anatomical differences from the earlier Neandertal (Mousterian) peoples, the Aurignacians brought with them a distinct stone tool technology based on the use of blades struck from blade cores. The also produced some of the first works of art. Follows the Mousterian tradition and precedes the Perigordian tradition."																		Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine) - southeastern 	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0.547		Fall of Constantipole 1453 AD = end of Byzantine Empire. Source = MET Timeline								Roman Iron Age	2.1										East-cental European Iron Age	2.8		"Scythian people displaced Cimmerian; and then expanded into Anatolia and Iran, etc.  Source = Archeology dictionary Distinctive early pottery styles; wheel-thrown wars are late. Iron weapontry, with swords of the ""akinakes"" type. Figural toreutic are in the Thracian animal style. Defended settlements; monumental stone architecture on urban sites; upland sanctuaries. Imported Greek and Persian luxury goods. Follows the Western European Late Bronze Age and Northeastern European Bronze Age, partially overlaps with the the Northeastern European Iron Age. Precedes the historic. "								TOP	3.1		"Top of the Southeastern European Bronze Age (Cycladic, Cypriot, Helladic, including Myceanean, Minoan periods)"								Southeastern European Bronze Age	5.1		"Cycladic, Cypriot, Helladic, including Myceanean, Minoan periods.  The main diagnostic features of this age are the ceramics, which can be used to dilineate regional subtraditions as well as periods and phases within the Southeastern European Bronze Age. Ceramics are usually well made, and may be slipped and/or burnished, painted, incised, or impressed with patterns. Minoan hieroglyphics, Linear A (undeciphered), and the Mycenaean Linear B script are present at some sites. Bronze weapons and ornaments are also present and further serve as cultural and chronological markers. Follows the Northern Mediterranean Neolithic Age, and preceeds the historic periods beginning with the Dark Age and continuring from there. It is divided into Early, Middle, and Late Bronze periods. (E.B.A. c. 5,100 – 4,000B.P.; M.B.A. c. 4,000 – 3,500B.P.; L.B.A.. c. 3,500 – 3,100B.P.) "								Southeastern European Late Chalcolithic	5.7		"The tradition is characterised by the emergence of massive copper tools and by prestige items made of gold, the development of surface architechure, and the gradual complexity of form and growth in size of settlements. The East Balkan area was characterised by fortified nucleated settlements of tell type with necropoles outside the residential area, and the eastern Carpathian-North Pontic area by flat macrosettlements with central plazas. Specific for the tradition was waddle-and-daub house with wooden and clay platform. Medium and large sized flint blades or massive stone axes are also characteristic. Ceramic vases very well fired, were decorated with angular or/and curvilinear patterns wiith graphite or incision and encrusted colour in the east Balkan and north Danube zone. In the eastern Carpathian area, bi- or thrichrome painting was practised. Anthropomorphic and zoomorphic clay figurines and architectural clay models are also diagnostic features of the tradition. The eastern Carpatian and northwestern Pontic area is characterised by the absence of necropoles. Follows the Southeastern European Early Chalcolithic tradition, precedes the Southeastern European Bronze Age. "								Southeastern European Early Chalcolithic	6.2		"The southeastern Europe Early Chalcolithic tradition is characterised by incipient use of copper, the emergence of surface architechture, houses in rows and circles, and the beginning of fortified tell settlements. Ceramics ranked into two classes (for common use and prestige) are the diagnostic features of the tradition. Presitge ceramic vases decorated with angular or/and curvilinear incised patterns. crusted ware with red and white and with graphite towards the end of the tradition, as well as  anthropomorphic, zoomorphic and architechtual clay figurines and models are also diagnostic features. Stone instruments as medium-sized flint blades or stone axes are characteristic for the whole Balken-East Pontic area. Small copper instruments, rolled copper beads made by hammering. Crouched and extended inhumation, first necropoles separated from settlements, specialsed cultic areas. Follows the Southeastern Europe Neolithic and precedes the Southeastern Europe Late Chalcolithic tradition. "								"Southeastern European Neolithic (Karanovo, Sesklo) "	8		"The first evidence of plant and animal domestication and the first ceramics in the region. Ceramic begins as plain wares in simple bowl and jar forms but later are slipped and painted with geometric designs and have more diverse and complex forms. Ceramics are well-known and are the subject of detailed typologies and analyses. Polished stone axes first appear and stone grinders, bown awls, and shell beads are also diagnostic of this tradition. The chipped stone industry consists primarily of blades or bladelets. Anthropomorphic and geomorphic figurines become common. Follows the Northern Mediterranean Mesolithic and precedes the Southern European Chalcolithic."								Solutrean	22		"Projectile points.  Named from Solutré, site in central France."								Perigordian (Upper Perigordian)	30		"Lithic technology of the Perigordian includes Gravette and micro-Gravette points, tanged Font-Robert points, truncated elements, and Raysse and Noailles burins. Although the diagnostic types pertaining to the Peridordian V subphases were originally considered to be chronologically segregated, recent excavations at the southwestern French site of Le Flageolet I has demonstrated that the tools (specifically Font-Rober points, truncated elements, and Noailles burins) may coexist in the same Perigordian V archaeological unit. Antler, bone and ivory implements include Isturitz sagaies; a range of long slender sagaies (projectile points), some with a groove; sagaies whose base has a single side-bevel (Gravettian lateral-bevelled points); sagaies with roughly cut or hacked bases; and short, bipointed sagaies with round section (similar to the Aurignacian spindle-shaped points) or flat section. Artistic expression takes the form of painting, engraving, and bas relief descriptions on cave walls along with the production of three-dimensional sculpted forms, most notably female figurines and personal ornaments. Settlement patterns most likely include seasonal use of home-base and special-activity camps in rock shelters, caves and the open air. Follows the Aurignacian tradition and precedes the Solutrean. "																		Southeast (Balkans-Ukraine) -  northern	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0.547		Fall of Constantipole 1453 AD = end of Byzantine Empire. Source = MET Timeline								Roman Iron Age	2.1										TOP	6		Top of the  Northern European Mesolithic (Epipaleolithic)								Northern Mediterranean Mesolithic (Epipaleolithic)	11		"Geometric microliths, portable art. Follows the Madalenian, precedes the southeastern European Bronze Age."																		Central (Austria to Poland)	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0.194		Napoleon terminates Holy Roman Empire in 1806 AD. Source = MET Timeline								Holy Roman Empire	1.038										Romano-Celtic (Proto-Celtic)	2.1		"Introduction of Roman artefacts and architecture. Artefacts include Roman coinage (gradual disappearance of coinage of local rulers), terra sigillata pottery, post-Dressel 1 amphorae, Roman-style jewellery; features include rectilinear buildings and fortresses, use of stone and mortar, Roman-style temples and villas, baths, amphitheaters, paved roads. There is also a type of non-Roman temple architecture that occurs mainly later in the period, with small squarish stone buildings, probably two stories, surrounded by a portico. Follows West-Central European Late Iron Age, precedes the historic period. "								Celtic (La Tène) culture (West Central European Iron Age)	2.4		"Characterized by iron tools, particularly knives and swords. Diverse handmade and wheelmade pottery and unique styles of decorative art. Villages of neatly arranged wattle-and-daub houses sat next to large cemeteries containing either inhumations or cremations. Weapons were usually buried with men and jewellery with women. Follows the West-Central European Early Iron Age tradition and precedes the Romano-British and Roman Iron Age traditions. By about 2500 B.P., the techniques to forge iron tools and jewellery made of low grade steel were widespread in Europe, and remained largely unchanged until the Middle Ages. The Celtic expansion starting about 2480 B.P., commonly referred to as the La Tene phase of Celtic culture, marked the division between the Early and Late Iron Age in Europe. The end of the prehistoric Iron Age was heralded by the Roman conquest in the Alpine zone as far as the Danube River (c. 2015 B.P.) "								West-Central European Early Iron Age (Hallastatt C/D)	2.8		"Extensive use of iron and bronze for personal ornament, tools, and weapons; geometric design on pottery, which begins to be made on the fast potters wheel this period. Trade in amber, glass, tin, graphite, and imported luxury goods from the Mediterranean and the East Alpine region. Mortuary ritual includes inhumation and cremation under tumuli as well as in flat graves cemeteries. Appearance of high status  tumulus burials known as ""Fustengraber"" or ""princely burials"" in the West Hallstat area.  Settlement patterns includes dispersed hamlets. as well as hill forts of 3-50 ha often located on or near major river systems. Hallstatt period, follows the Late Bronze Age/Unifield period, precedes the Late Iron Age/La Tene period."								TOP	4		Top of the European Early Bronze Age								European Early Bronze Age	4.7		"Appearance of bronze tools and onaments and local bronze manufacture; appearance of new metal types, such as elaborate shaft-hole axes and the first blade weapons (swords); continuation of copper tools and ornaments. Outstanding features include formation of tell-sites in Pannonia and other lowland areas; fortified sites in the surrounding uplands; shell tempered pottery; separate cemetery sites; a great deal of regional diversity in material cultures (i.e., ceramics);  and new modes of subsistence. Cultural traditions become increasingly regional and localised. The Early Bronze Age (EBA) follows the European Eneolithic and precedes the Northeastern and the Western European Bronze Age traditions. "								Hallstatt cultures	6		"Pottery decorated with twisted cord ornament found in north and central Europe. Until ca 2450 BP (site). Associated with Battle-Ax culture, which may have been an influx of Indo-European language group. Source = Archeology dictionary."								Linear Pottery culture (Linearbandkeramik (LBK) culture)	6.5		Ceramics decorated with incised or impressed lines or bands; shoe-last adzes; and long houses. Follows the Western European Mesolithic tradition and precedes the Middle Neolithic period. 								Magdalenian	18		"A  distinctive set of typologically defined tools, based on prepared core blade production, including numerous blacked bladelets, dihedra burins, burins on truncation, end-scrapers on blades, percoirs, and becs. An elaborate bone tool technology, including beveled sagaie bone points, single and double row barbed harpoons, and eyed needles. Production of mobiliary art on utilitarian and non-utilitarian objects, including animal, human and geometric motifs, and parietal art, including many of the celebrated painted caves of Southwestern France. Last tradition of the European Upper Paleolithic, follows the Solutrean tradition, precedes the Mesolithic tradition of Europe."																		S France-Iberia (West Central)	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0.208		French Revolution in 1792.  Source = MET Timeline								"Capetian, Valois, and Bourbon (France); Iberian kingdoms"	1.038		962 = begin Capetian; ca 1037 begin Spanish kingdoms. Source = MET Timeline								Carolingian (France); Umayyad (Iberia)	1.249		751 AD = begin Carolingian; 711 AD = begin Umayyads in Iberia. Source = MET Timeline								Merovingian (France); Visigoths (Iberia)	1.518		482 AD = begin Merovingian; 409 AD = begin Visigoths. Source = MET Timeline								Roman	2.1										Central European Early Iron Age	2.8		"Scythian people displaced Cimmerian; and then expanded into Anatolia and Iran, etc.  Source = Archeology dictionary"								TOP	3.6		Top of the Bell Beaker								Bell Beaker people	4.5		"Characteristic bell-shaped pottery beakers in graves.  Brought copper metallurgy to north and west Europe. Source = Archeology dictionary. The Bell Beaker is a characteristic type of beaker with a form similar to an inverted bell. It is usually finely decorated with horizontal bands made with incised, impressed, or excised techniques, and it is usually ornamented all over. The vessels are excellently made, well finished, and thoroughly fired to a red-brown or reddish colour. Associated with the Bell Beaker is a group of objects called the Bell Beaker ""package"". Among these objects there are tanged copper daggers, ornaments of sheet gold, tanged flint arrowheads, V-perforated buttons, wristbands to protect the archer's forearms, and ornaments such as bracelets in the shape of a half moon. Chalcolithic and in some areas, until the beginning of the Early Bronze Age. "								Corded Ware culture	6		"Pottery decorated with twisted cord ornament found in north and central Europe.  Associated with Battle-Ax culture, which may have been an influx of Indo-European language group. Source = Archeology dictionary."								Impressed Ware	6.8		"Impressed Ware pottery, polished stone artefacts, transverse arrowheads. Follows the Western European Mesolithic, and is commonly referred to as the Early Neolithic period."								Azilian	12.5		"Most dramatically is the disappearance of Upper Paleolithic parietal art tradition. Azilian art consists of smooth pebbles painted, and occasionally engraved, with red and black lines, dots, and borders. Less common designs include simple geometric elements such as crosses and chevrons. The Azilian appears sometime after about 12,500 B.P. during the Bolling Interstadial oscillation and fades after 9,500 B.P. with the end of the Younger Dryas. "								TOP	16.5		Top of the Solutrean								Magdalenian	18		"A  distinctive set of typologically defined tools, based on prepared core blade production, including numerous blacked bladelets, dihedra burins, burins on truncation, end-scrapers on blades, percoirs, and becs. An elaborate bone tool technology, including beveled sagaie bone points, single and double row barbed harpoons, and eyed needles. Production of mobiliary art on utilitarian and non-utilitarian objects, including animal, human and geometric motifs, and parietal art, including many of the celebrated painted caves of Southwestern France. Last tradition of the European Upper Paleolithic, follows the Solutrean tradition, precedes the Mesolithic tradition of Europe."								Solutrean	21		"Standard Upper Paleolithic lithic stone tools endscrapers, burins, perforators, sometimes backed blades and bladelets, associated with bifacially or unifacially invasively flaked points and knives “laurel” and “willow leaves”, invasively flaked or marginally backed shouldered points, and more rarely, tanged points. Bone artefacts include antler points, eyed bone needles, and rare spearthrowers, the latter two types invented in the Solutrean. Follows the Gravettian (Upper Perigordian), precedes the early Magdalenian (Badegoulian)."								TOP	25		Top of the Aurignacian								Perigordian	30		"Flint industry. Early Perigordian is not found in upward continuity with Late Perigordian which was an Upper Palaeolithic industry characterized by well-developed blade tools of flint and female figurines of ivory. Succeeded the Aurignacian and preceded the Solutrean, c 28,000-20,000BP. The small, pointed blades with straight blunted backs are called Gravette points. Most of the French sites are caves, but possibly related industries, known as Eastern Gravettian, are distributed through the loess lands of central Europe and Russia at the camp sites of mammoth-hunters. The Gravettians invented the bow and arrow, blunted-back knives of flint, and the tanged arrowheads. They are famous for their cave paintings. Other artifacts include bone or ivory spears and, in eastern Europe, numerous other bone tools incised with an elaborate geometric pattern."								Aurignacian	40		"Stone and flint tools (with heavy marginal retouch).  Named after Aurignac site in S. France. The Aurignacian people are the first modern humans in Europe. In addition to the anatomical differences from the earlier Neandertal (Mousterian) peoples, the Aurignacians brought with them a distinct stone tool technology based on the use of blades struck from blade cores. The also produced some of the first works of art. Follows the Mousterian tradition and precedes the Perigordian tradition. "																		Western/West-Central Europe	block	150	246/187/202		off							Top	1.518		482 AD = begin Merovingian; 409 AD = begin Visigoths. Source = MET Timeline								Roman Iron Age	2.033		"Three-aisled long houses with wooden and wattle-and-daub walls or turf walls in some areas, often oriented west-east, with entrances in the long sides and often a byre area. Handmade pottery, extensive use of Roman imports. Use of urned cremation or furnished inhumation. Offerings of animals, humans, weapons, and other material in watery areas. Follows the West-Central European Late Iron Age, precedes the historic period."								West-Central European Late Iron Age	2.7		"Distinctive early pottery styles; wheel-thrown wares are late. Iron weaponry, with swords of “akinakes” type. Figural toreutic art in the Thracian animal style. Defended settlements; monumental stone architecture on urban sites; upland sanctuaries. Imported Greek and Persian luxury goods. Follows the Western European Late Bronze Age and Northeastern Bronze Age, partially overlaps with the Northeastern European Iron Age. Precedes the historic period. Because iron is in regular use from at least Hallstatt A2 period (3050 B.P.), scholars in Bulgaria and Romania choose to date the beginning of the Iron Age early. However, characteristically “Hallstatt” social and economic forms do not emerge until Hallstatt C; thus, conventional, pan-European terminology is retained here. The early Iron Age Hallstatt phases (Ha C and D) are contemporary with the Orientalizing, Archaic, and early Classical periods of the Greek Black sea colonies; the later, La Tene, Iron Age phases (LT A-D) correspond to the later Classical and Hellenistic periods, and are ended by Roman conquest. "								Western European Late Bronze Age (Urnfield) 	3.3		"Use of bronze for most tools, weapons, armor, elite vessels, and jewelry, with iron used for small objects and decoration on bronze objects. Distinctive handmade burnished and slipped pottery, often decorated with channelling, fluting, incising, bosses, and graphite. Geometric and solar symbolism. Cremation burial in urn graves in communal cemetaries often adjacent to contemporary settlements. Introduction of new foods such as millet, oats, rye, and flax. Domestic horses become more common.  Dynamic system of trade. Ideology of warrior elite, expressed in arms and armor, symbolism, settlement pattern, and burial rites. Follows the western European Middle Bronze Ae tradition and precedes the west-central European Early Iron Age tradition."								Western European Earlier Bronze Age (Tumulus Culture)	3.8		"Two major changes take place in the earlier Bronze Age to differentiate it from the preceding Bell Beaker and earlier traditions is 1.) the use of bronze, primarily for weapons and ornaments; 2.) the burial in single graves (i.e. noncommunal), and in many areas under a small mound of earth; and 3.) the construction of fortified settlements, particularly in central Europe. Follows the Bell Beaker and European Bronze Age traditions. "								Linear Pottery culture (Linearbandkeramik (LBK) culture)	6.5		Ceramics decorated with incised or impressed lines or bands; shoe-last adzes; and long houses. Follows the Western European Mesolithic tradition and precedes the Middle Neolithic period. 								Western European Mesolithic	9.5		"Characterized by distinctive microliths as well as by flint axes, adzes, and picks made fully or partially using the new technique of stone grinding. The people of this time also made spears, harpoons, mattocks, and other types of tools out of deer and elk bone and antler, as well as using wood for dugout canoes, axe gandles, and spear shafts. Sites are usually small and found on lakeshores. Thus sites are abundant in fish bones and fishing equipment such as fish hooks, basket traps, and nets. The mesolithic begins later in northwestern Europe. The Maglemose or Maglemosian tradition appears in southern Scandinavia sometime after 9,500 B.P., spreads to adjacent regions of the European plain, and persists until c. 7,500 or 7,000 B.P."																		British Isles - NW France 	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0										"Tudor, Stuart, Hanoverian, Windsor"	0.515										Plantagenet	0.846										Norman	0.934		Norman conquest of Britain in 1066. Source = MET Timeline								Anglo-Saxon	1.6										Romano-British (Proto-Celtic)	2.1		"Introduction of Roman artefacts and architecture. Artefacts include Roman coinage (gradual disappearance of coinage from local rulers), terra sigillata pottery, post-Dressel 1 amphorae, Roman style jewellery; features include rectilinear buildings and fortresses, use of stone and mortar, Roman-style temples and villas, baths, amphitheatres, paved roads. There is also a type of non-Roman temple architecture that occurs mainly later in the period, with a  small squarish stone building, probably two stories, surrounded by portico. Iron age (La Tene) decoration continues to some extent as does traditional architecture. Follows the West-Central European Late Iron Age, precedes the historic period."								Wessex culture in British Isles	4										TOP	4.5		"Top of the European Megalithic (Western European Late Neolithic, Western European pre-Beaker Chalcolithic, Western European pre-Beaker Eneolithic, Western European pre-Beaker Copper Age)"								European Megalithic	6		"The European Megalithic  (Western European Late Neolithic, Western European pre-Beaker Chalcolithic, Western European pre-Beaker Eneolithic, Western European pre-Beaker Copper Age) is characterized by the appearance of megalithic constructions, sucs as long burrows, dolmens, and passage graves. Many of these constructions housed collective burials. In some regions, fortified hilltop settlements were characteristic. Ceramic forms and decoration vary by region, although the use of polished stone tools and towards the end of the tradition copper object typify the period. Follows the Impressed Ware and Linear Ware traditions, precedes the Corded Ware, Bell Beaker, and Early European Bronze Age traditions. "								Western European Mesolithic	9.5		"Characterised by distinctive microlithic stone repertoire as well as by flint axes, adzes and picks made either entirely by flaking or in combination with the new technique of stone grinding. Maglemosians also made spears, harpoons, mattocks, and other types of tools of deer and elk bone and antler and made wide use of wood for dugout canoes, axe handles, and spear shafts. The wooden bow and microlith tipped arrow appear to have been the main weapon. Sites have been small and located along lakeshores. Sites are abundant in fish bones, fishhooks, basket traps, and seine nets, leisters, and other fishing equipment. The Mesolithic begins later in northwestern Europe. The Maglemose or Maglemosian tradition appears in southern Scandinavia sometime after 9,500 B.P., spreads to adjacent regions of the European plain, and persists until c. 7,500 or 7,000 B.P. "								Azilian	12.5		"Most dramatically is the disappearance of Upper Paleolithic parietal art tradition. Azilian art consists of smooth pebbles painted, and occasionally engraved, with red and black lines, dots, and borders. Less common designs include simple geometric elements such as crosses and chevrons. The Azilian appears sometime after about 12,500 B.P. during the Bolling Interstadial oscillation and fades after 9,500 B.P. with the end of the Younger Dryas. "								Magdalenian	18		"A  distinctive set of typologically defined tools, based on prepared core blade production, including numerous blacked bladelets, dihedra burins, burins on truncation, end-scrapers on blades, percoirs, and becs. An elaborate bone tool technology, including beveled sagaie bone points, single and double row barbed harpoons, and eyed needles. Production of mobiliary art on utilitarian and non-utilitarian objects, including animal, human and geometric motifs, and parietal art, including many of the celebrated painted caves of Southwestern France. Last tradition of the European Upper Paleolithic, follows the Solutrean tradition, precedes the Mesolithic tradition of Europe."																		British Isles - NW France sub-intervals	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	2.1		Top of the Bell Beaker								Bell Beaker people	4.5		Characteristic bell-shaped pottery beakers in graves.  Brought copper metallurgy to north and west Europe. Source = Archeology dictionary.								Ertbolle	4.5		"Abundance of shell middens. Pottery appears c. 5700-5100, Microblades and ground-stone tools are the primary diagnostic artefacts for the Western European Mesolithic tradition. Microblades were made in a variety of geometric shapes, the most common being trapezoidal. Flaked stone tool axes and adzes are also commonly found artefacts, as are barbed harpoon points of antler or bone."								Kongmeose	5.6		"Microblades and ground-stone tools are the primary diagnostic artefacts for the Western European Mesolithic tradition. Microblades were made in a variety of geometric shapes, the most common being trapezoidal. Flaked stone tool axes and adzes are also commonly found artefacts, as are barbed harpoon points of antler or bone. The Kongmeose replaces the Maglemosian period early in the Atlantic pollen zone. "																		European - Northeast	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0										Scandinavian regional kingdoms	0.9		"Viking culture replaced by separate kingdoms in Denmark, Norway and Sweden (see MET timeline)"								Viking culture	1.22		Source = MET Timeline								Vendel culture	1.5		Source = MET Timeline								TOP	1.843		Top of the Northeastern European Iron Age (Dacian)								Northeastern European Iron Age (Dacian)	2.8		"Diverse styles in handmade and wheel-turned pottery. Elaborate development of bronze and iron weaponry. Decorative and iconographic art styles. Evidence for social hierarchies with marked ethnic, and gender differentiation in funerary evidence. A wide variety of defended and open settlements, becoming proto-urban. Cult and sanctuary sites. Follows the northeastern European Bronze Age and precedes the historic period. In the regional chronology, it follows the late Urnfield period (phase Ha B) and includes the earlier, or Hallstatt, Iron Age (phases Ha C and D) and later, or La Tene, Iron Age ( phasesLT A-D). LT C and D overlap with the Dacian Iron Age, which continues into the historical period and ends during the reign of the Roman emperor, Trajan. "								"Northeastern European Bronze Age (Komarov, Trzciniec, Textile Pottery)"	3.8		"Ceramics with incised horizontal lines and zig-zag designs perdominate. In some northern areas, net or textile impressed ceramics were common. Ceramics were handmade and pit-fired, some were slipped. Forms included bowls, tulip shaped jars, and s-shaped beakers. Bronze was used for a variety of items, mainly weapons and personal ornaments. Burials were often in small mounds, and both inhumation and cremation were practised. Follows the Corded Ware tradition, precedes the Northeasten European Iron Age tradition."								"Corded Ware culture (Battle Axe, Globular Amphorae)"	6		"Key diagnostic artifacts are ceramics decorated with impressed cord markings, usually in the form of parallel lines around the vessels neck. Ceramics are relatively crude, often flat bottomed, and with beaker forms common. In some areas globular amphorae with rounded bottoms, stone axes with a large hole for hafting (commonly called” battle axes”) are also diagnostic artifacts for the tradition. Some have argued that in addition to these artifacts, flexed burials with the battle axes and beakers, and demonstrating sexual differences in body placement, are also diagnostic of the Corded Ware tradition. Follows the Eastern European Mesolithic and Western European Mesolithic traditions. Precedes the Northeastern European Later Bronze age. Many scholars argue that the Corded Ware tradition represents early members of the Indo-European language group. "								Linear Pottery culture (Linearbandkeramik (LBK) culture)	6.5		Ceramics decorated with incised or impressed lines or bands; shoe-last adzes; and long houses. Follows the Western European Mesolithic tradition and precedes the Middle Neolithic period. 								TOP	11		Top of the Magdalenian								Magdalenian	18		"A  distinctive set of typologically defined tools, based on prepared core blade production, including numerous blacked bladelets, dihedra burins, burins on truncation, end-scrapers on blades, percoirs, and becs. An elaborate bone tool technology, including beveled sagaie bone points, single and double row barbed harpoons, and eyed needles. Production of mobiliary art on utilitarian and non-utilitarian objects, including animal, human and geometric motifs, and parietal art, including many of the celebrated painted caves of Southwestern France. Last tradition of the European Upper Paleolithic, follows the Solutrean tradition, precedes the Mesolithic tradition of Europe."																		European - Scandinavia	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0										Scandinavian regional kingdoms	0.9		"Viking culture replaced by separate kingdoms in Denmark, Norway and Sweden (see MET timeline)"								Viking culture	1.22										Vendel culture	1.5										"Scandinavian Iron Age (Roman Iron Age, Migration Period)"	2.5		"Iron tools such as arrow points, swords and plowshares; elaborate gold and silver objects. Follows the Scandinavian Bronze Agec, precedes the historic Viking period."								Scandinavian Bronze Age	3.8		"Bronzes, weapons, tools, ornaments, cir perdue bronze casting technique, rich spiral and geometric decoration, musical instruments (lurs), gold (cult), vessels, metal hoards, burial mounds and cairns, ship-shaped stone settings, inhumation burials in oak coffins, urn burials, rock carvings with cup marks, wheels, ships etc., three-aisled long-houses, dispersed settlement pattern, moving settlements, ard ploughed fields, animal husbandry. Follows the Scandinavian Neolithic, precedes the Iron Age."								 Scandinavian Neolithic	6		"Material attributes vary greatly in relation to period and region, with pottery being central to most chronological schemes. Especially in the northern regions, slate points and knives are diagnostic. Flint daggers, bronze axes, amber beads and pendants, and bone pins are characteristic of the last phase. Funerary structures include long earthen burrows, dolmens, passage graves, stone packing graves, small mounds, and stone cist graves. Ritual structures include causewayed camps fo the “Sarup type” and “cult houses” of the “Tustrup type”. Follows the Eastern European Mesolithic tradition and precedes the Scandinavian Bronze Age tradition. The southern Scandinavian chronology is often used as a standard of reference. This includes the Early (EN) and Middle Neolithic A (Mna), Funnel Beaker Culture (TRB), the Middle Neolithic B (MNb), Corded Ware/Battle Axe/Single Grave Culture, and the Late Neolithic (LN) period with a Bell Beaker and then early Bronze Age (Unetice) inspired culture. "																		Caucasian steppes to South Siberia	:	Caucasian steppes to South Siberia - Caucasian	Caucasian steppes to South Siberia - Steppe	Caucasian steppes to South Siberia - West Central Asia																		Caucasian steppes to South Siberia - Caucasian	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0										Russian empire	0.5		1550 AD is an average for Russian dominance. Source = MET Timeline								Mongol rule	0.785		1215 = begin Mongol khanates. Source = MET Timeline								TOP	3		Top of the Caucasian Bronze Age								Caucasian Bronze Age	5.6		"Handmade, then wheel-worn, typically black burnished ceramics decorated with incisions, relief ornamentation, and occasional paste inlays. Settlement sites in Transcaucasia are relatively small (1-2 ha.) to medium sized ( c. 12 ha.) until Late Bronze times (c. 3500-3000 B.P.) when they can be considerably larger; settlements in the northern Caucasus are less numerous and smaller. Both areas are characterised by rich raised burial mounds (kurgans) from late Early Bronze times on (c. 4300 B.P.). This tradition is one of the leading Old World metallurgical centers from late Early Bronze times on - producing weapons, tools, and jewellery made frist of arsenical, then of tin-bronzes, as well as rich silver and goldwork, inlaid with semiprecious stones. Follows the Caucasian Neolithic and Chalocolithic traditions, precedes the historic period in the region. "																		Caucasian steppes to South Siberia - Steppe	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0										Russian empire	0.5		1550 AD is an average for Russian dominance. Source = MET Timeline								Mongol rule	0.785		1215 = begin Mongol khanates. Source = MET Timeline								TOP	2.8		Top of the Andronovo								Andronovo	4		"Handmade, flat-bottomed jars and pots, decorated with rich geometrical designs. Bronze weapons and tools, decorative artefacts made from copper and gold, stone arrowheads, axes, and maces. Large rectangular half-dugout dwellings of frame/post construction made from wood, sometimes stone bases or clay daubing. Specific funeral rites: graves, consisting of dirt burial mounds or usually a round or rectangular stone wall, sometimes with a burial mound embankment at the center. The burial is in a dirt gravel pit, often with a wooden lining, a stone box, or a cyst for ritual inhumation and cremation. Accompanying the burial may be a horse, ox, or ram, vessels, decorations, and occasionally knives, weapons, or chariots. Follows the Kelteminar and Yamnaya traditions and precedes the Scythian tradition. "								 Eurasian Steppe Nomad	6.5		"The construction of kurgan mounds over the burial; the construction of flat burial grounds with stone foundations and cromlechs. The dead were buried individually in quadrangular pits roofed with wooden floors; the position of the dead is supine in contracted posture with the legs raised; the orientation is predominantly eastern; various uses of ochre in the burial rite. Funeral offerings eggshaped and pointed bottom vessels with a short neck, ornamented with single and double cord impressions, comb impressions; bronze four-faceted awls and leaf-shaped knives made of North Caucasus metal; upper quern stones and millstones; pendants made of animal fangs, bone hammer-shaped pins; wooden wagons; anthropomorphic stelae in the western region. Short term camp sites in the east and permanent settlements in the west. Follows the Eastern European Mesolithic tradition and precedes the Scythian tradition. "																		Caucasian steppes to South Siberia - West Central Asia	block	150	246/187/202		off							TOP	0										Russian empire	0.5		1550 AD is an average for Russian dominance. Source = MET Timeline								Mongol rule	0.785		1215 = begin Mongol khanates. Source = MET Timeline								TOP	1.7		Approximate fading out of Scyths.  Unstable kingdoms until Mongol invasion. Top of the Scythian								Scythian	4		"The key diagnostic features of the Scythian tradition are the large burial mounds or kurgans these people built and the exquisite gold jewellery and bronze tools that they placed with the dead buried in them. Follows the Eurasian Steppe Named tradition, precedes the historic period. Overlaps with the Early Nomad tradition in East-Central Asia. "								TOP	4		Top of the Kelteminar								Kelteminar	8		"Microlithic stone tools, including projectile points and scrapers; globular ceramics decorated with wavy or zigzag parallel lines. Follows the Eastern European Mesolitic tradition, precedes the Andronovo tradition. "																																								Arctic and Subarctic	:	Arctic overview	Siberia-Baikal	"Amur, Northeast Asia"	Alaska	_METACOLUMN_OFF																Arctic overview	:	Generalized Arctic ages																				Siberia-Baikal	:	Siberia	Baikal	_METACOLUMN_OFF																		"Amur, Northeast Asia"	:	Amur	Northeast Asia	Central Kamchatka	Kamchatka	_METACOLUMN_OFF																Alaska	:	Alaska - North	Alaska - East	Alaska - South	Alaska - West	_METACOLUMN_OFF																Northwest and Canada	:	Northwest and Canada - Eastern Subarctic	Northwest and Canada - Coastal	Northwest and Canada - Western Subarctic	Northwest and Canada - Southern Subarctic																	Generalized Arctic ages	block	150	208/207/234	notitle	off							TOP	0										Thule	2.1		Archeology dictionary says that Thule began at about 900 AD (a 1000 years later than the Prehistory encyclopedia); and was ancestral to historic Eskimo fom Siberia to Greenland								Arctic Small Tool	4.7										Archaic	6										Paleo-Indian (Neolithic)	12										Late Paleolithic	42										Mousterian	130																				Siberia	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0.5		Siberian Protohistoric								Siberian Protohistoric	2		"Iron tools first make their appearance in Northern Siberia diruing the Siberian Proto-historic period. Ceramics are crude, often globular in form and with rounded bases. Flaked stone arrow points are present, and projectile points, knives, and other stone tools made of bone are common. Late in the period, horse and cattle appear along with their obvious accoutrements such as saddles and muzzles.  "								Siberian Neolithic and Bronze	8		"Microliths inset into bone and antler tools, bone/antler harpoons, polished lug (trunnion) adzes, polished slate points and knives, and comb-stamped ceramics are the major diagnostic cultural remains of the Neolithic. Copper tools begin to appear in small numbers about 4,000 B.P. Bronze itself is very rare and restricted to the far southwestern portion of the region; hence the term ""Bronze Age"" is something of a misnomer. "								TOP	10		Siberian Late Upper Paleolithic								Siberian Late Upper Paleolithic	19		"Wedge-shaped core and microblade technology, slotted antler and bone poiints, transverse burins, smalll end scrapers, and large side scrapers are the major diagnostic cultural remains of the Late Upper Palaeolithic. Diagnostic hominid fossils are anatomically modern. "								Siberian Middle Upper Paleolithic	25		"Parallel and subprismatic core and blade technology, small end scrapers, canted gravers, ivory female statuettes and other works of mobiliary art, and substantial semisubterranean dwelling features are the major diagnostic cultural remains of the Siberian Middle Upper Palaeolithic. Diagnostic hominid fossils are anatomically modern. "								Siberian Early Upper Paleolithic	42		"Parallel and subprismatic core and blade technology, unifacial points on blades, angle burins on blades, and end scrapers on blades are the major diagnostic cultural remains of the Siberian Early Upper Palaeolithic. Diagnostic hominid fossils are absent. "																		Baikal	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	3	TOP of the Baikal Neolithic and Bronze									Baikal Neolithic and Bronze	8	"Lithic blade industry, including mircoblade technology. Burins, perforators, and drills. Small flaked stone projectile points in various forms. Ground slate fishhooks shanks, shaft straighteners, adzes, knives, and ornaments (the last three also have nephrite). Bone/antler leister prongs, harpoon heads, and ornaments. Small, thick-walled, decorated ceramic vessels of various shapes. Inhumation cemeteries, some with evidence of cremation. In the later part of the period, addition of copper alloy fishhooks, needles, knives, and ornaments. "																			Amur	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	1.5		Top of the Amur Neolithic and Bronze								Amur Neolithic and Bronze	12		"Flat bottomed ceramic vessels are characteristic vessels are characteristic  of the Amur Neolithic. These are decorated in a variety of styles, including stamping, cord marking, and textile impressing. Incised horizontal zigzag designs are characteristic during much of the period. Well-made lanceolate projectile points with slightly excurvate bade edges and a deep basal notch are also diagnostic. Follows the Amur Paleolithic, precedes the historic period in the region. "								Amur Paleolithic	30		"Amur Palaeolithic assemblages are defined by primarily being nonceramic. There are some distinctive laurel-leaf shaped projectile points and knives associated with the Amur Palaeolithic, as well as crude pebble choppers and scrapers. Tehre is some use of Levallois-type disk cores and a few examples of prismatic blade cores. Follows the East Asian Middle Palaeolithc tradition, precedes the Amur Neolithic tradition. "																		Northeast Asia	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	3		TOP of the Holocene Stone Age of Northeast Asia								Holocene Stone Age of Northeast Asia	10.5		"Very significant cultural changes took place in northeast Asia around the Pleistocene-Holocene boundary. Two of the most characteristic featuresof the local Palaeolithic tradition became extinct: the wedge-shaped core method of flint knapping, which was replaced by the microprismatic technique; and bifaces, which remained out of use for the next several millennia until Neolithic times. The appearance of microprismatic technology is for the most important technological step. Microprismatic technology is present, with frequent modifications, in all local cultures of the Holocene Stone Age. The beginning of Neolithic is marked by the appearance of bifaces and the appearance of ceramics. Follows the Siberian Palaeolithic tradition and precedes the Siberian Protohistoric tradition. "																		Central Kamchatka	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0.5		TOP of the Old Itel'men								Old Itel'men	5		"Diagnostic stone tools  including scrapers, perforators, knives, including polished ones, polished axes, burins. Bone tools such as harpoons, including toggling, composite, and whole-cut fishing hooks, net needles, scrapers, and arrow points. The presence of toggling harpoons implies the use of boats to hunt sea mammals in the open sea. Fishing nets, hooks, spears, and wiers are common. Ceramics of the Ainu-type (Neiji) and Koryak type are found. Nettle-fibre textiles are present. Houses are of two forms: light summer dwellings made of branches that were probably covered with skins, and semisubterranean, rectangular sod houses. Follows the Tarya Neolithic tradition, precedes the historic period. It is the direct ancestor of the historically known Itel'man people. "																		Kamchatka	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	2.5		TOP of the Tarya Neolithic								Tarya Neolithic	4		"Stone bifacially worked tools and polished axes, including flat retouched leaf-shaped, triangular, and stemmed points; scrapers on flakes and blades; leaf-shaped and stemmed backed knives; polished and chipped axes of triangluar and oval shape. Fishing gear, including net sinkers and hooks. Ceramics were made, although they are not well known. Textiles were made from woven nettles. Light, frame summer houses and semi-subterranean winter houses. Follows the Kamchatka Mesolithic tradition and precedes the Old Itel'men tradition."								Kamchatka Mesolithic	8		"Stemmed points on blades; bifacial tools; conic, prismatic, and pencil cores; mircoblades; ceramic are rare or non-existent. Follows the Siberian Late Upper Palaeolithic, precedes the historic."																		Alaska - North	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0.25	Dashed	Top of the Aleutian								TOP	2.5		Western Arctic Small Tool								Western Arctic Small Tool	4.7		"Numerous relatively narrow microblades; bipointed projectile points and sides blades suggest the presence of the bow and arrow. Indented base points possibly used harpoon inserts, delicate burins, and well fashioned scrapers of chipped chalcedony, all noted for small size and delicacy of workmanship. Houses are known from only a few sites located at rivers and lakes in the interior portions of the occupation ranges; these are usually roughly square, 3 - 5m on a side, and excavated into the contemporary surface up to .5m. Temporary campsites are much more widespread, a small minority of them at coastal locations. Follows the Northern Archaic tradition, with terminal portions of which it coexisted; precedes the Norton tradition, a modified descendant with portions of which remnant Western Arctic Small Tool assemblages coexisted. Some researchers in North Alaska expand the Western Aractic Small Tool tradtition to also include the Norton tradition. "								Aleutian	6		"Diverse lithic and bone tool industry. Stone tools are mostly unifacially or bifacially retouched and include projectile points, knives, scrapers, and adzes. Other stone tools include pecked stone oil lamps, fishing sinkers, and ground stone knives. Bone tools include wedges, unilaterally and bilaterally barbed bone spear and harpoon points, and bird-bone needles and awls. Follows the Paleo-Arctic tradition; precedes the historic period of the enthnographically known Aleut culture. "																		Alaska - East	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0										"Eskimo, Athapaskan"	0.4		"Arbitrarily placed in ""historic"" (after 1600)"								TOP	2.7		"Eastern Arctic Small Tool, and Kodiak"								Eastern Arctic Small Tool	4		"Tent rings, including midpassage structures; spalled burins and microblades; both tang-basd, barbed, nontoggling harpoon heads and open-socketed toggling harpoon heads; triangular  and bipointed end blades for harpoons and arrows. Represents the earliest human occupation of the region; precedes Dorset. "																		Alaska - South	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	1		TOP of the Norton								Norton	3		"Harpoon, arrow, and dart heads of antler or ivory; labrets; chipped projectile points and side blades; settlements chiefly on the coast of major rivers, campsites in the interior. Distinctive art style in one subtradition (Ipiutak). Cermanics - generally fibre tempered, linear, or check stamped - as well as stone lamps and minor polished slate in two subtraditions (Choris, Norton). Burins in one subtradition (Choris). Follows the Western Arctic Small Tool tradition, althought probably coexistent with final aspects of it; precedes the Thule tradition, although contemporary for some centuries with early regional aspects of it. Some investigators working in North Alaska incorporate this tradition in an expanded Western Arctic Small Tool tradition. "								Kodiak (Kachemak)	4		"Small, single-room houses with depressed floors, clay-lined interiors pits, rectangular stone slab hearths, and slab-covered floor drains; artefacts from human bones and other ritual treatment of and dismemberment of the dead; ground slate main lithic technology in late phase; abundant notched pebble net weights, grooved cobble line weights, cobble spall tools, stone lamps, lamps of anthropomorphic and zoomorphic sculptures in late phase; toggle and other harpoon heads, spear prongs, labrets and other ornaments, delicate eyed needles; preservation favours recovery of stone and bone. Follows the Ocean Bay tradition, precedes the historic period."								Ocean Bay	8		"Red-ocher covered floors, large ochre grinders, undefined semisubterranean house (Early), circular semisubterranean house (Late), rectangular stone slab hearths, macroblades (Early) slotted bone points for microblade insets, microblade cores (Early), tiny to large flaked chert projectile points in various styles (including knives), flaked adze bits with only minor grinding, barbed bone harpoon heads in one style with line guards but no line hole (absence of toggling harpoon heads), delicate eye needles, fishhooks,  stone lamps, atlatl hook, distinctive sawn, scraped and ground slate technology that partially replaces flaked stone for projectile points and pointed knives (Late), cobble spall saws, and scapers for slate (Late). Initial in the local sequence, precedes the Kodiak (Kachemak) tradition. Early Ocean Bay arose within or was a part of the Anagula-Chaluka transistion phase (7,800 - 4,000 B.P. uncalibrated carbon-14 years) of the eastern Aleutian islands. "								Paleo-Arctic	11		"Microblades, small, wedge-shaped prismatic cores, disk bifaces, leaf-shaped bifaces, burins. Precedes the Northern Archaic tradition. "																		Alaska - West	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0.1		TOP of the Thule								Thule	2.1		"Culture complex expanded eastward out of Alaska to Greenland beginning by 1000 B.P., established across all the North American Arctic zone by 700 B.P.  Toggling harpoon heads, drag floats for harpoon lines, sealing darts used with a throwing board, bird darts, bolas, fish spears. Single and double holed, enclosed men's boats (kayak) and open multipassanger women's boats (umiak) were used in hunting and travel. Ground stone replaced chipped stone tools throughout the tradition. Pottery in early phases is corrugated or paddle impressed with fibre/sand temper, later a plain ware, thick, less well fires, larger vessel shapes, gravel tempered with incised or punctate designs. Decorative styles of encraving, particularly on ivory harpoon heads, progressed from a complex interplay of animal forms (Okvik/Old Bering Sea) to geometric designs (Punuk/Thule). Pit houses were square to rectangular with entry passage and cold trap. House-pit villages were located on beach strands or headlands adjacent to route of whale migrations. Follows the Norton cultural tradition and merges into the historic period."																		Northwest and Canada - Eastern Subarctic	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0										"Inuit, Athapaskan"	0.4		"Arbitrarily placed in ""historic"" (after 1600)"								TOP	4		Top of the Northern and Shield Archaic								Shield Archaic	6		"Shield Archaic sites are characterised by three primary types of flaked stone tools: scrapers, bifacial knives, and projectile points (often side-notched). Lancolate spear points, knives, fishhooks, and other tools of raw hammered copper are found in areas near copper sources, particularly north of Lake Superior. There is a lack of the ground stone tools generally found in Archaic sites farther south. Follows the Late Palaeo-Indian tradition, precedes the initial Shield Woodland tradition."								Paleo-Arctic	11		"Microblades, small, wedge-shaped prismatic cores, disk bifaces, leaf-shaped bifaces, burins. Precedes the Northern Archaic tradition. "																		Northwest and Canada - Coastal	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0.2		"TOP of the Late Northwest Coast (Developed Northwest Coast, Late Pacific, Late Prehistoric, Late Marine)"								"Late Northwest Coast (Developed Northwest Coast, Late Pacific, Late Prehistoric, Late Marine)"	1.5		"Chipped stone occurs throughout the region but is most common in the north. In the central and southern subregions, chipped stone points are more common. Ground-stone points are more common in the north, but ground-stone knives, clubs and large woodworking tools like celts, mauls, and adzes are found throughout the region. Bone was used to make anything from straight needles to bilaterally barbed harpoon points. Whale bone was used to make clubs in central and southern subregions. Rare and exotic materials such as obsidian, native copper, and drift iron (from shipwrecks) were held in high esteem, and ornaments or tools of these materials symbolised prestige and rank throughout the region. Wood was probably the most common material in use, although it is preserved less frequently than other substances. Wood was used for post and beam houses, large carved canoes, bent-wood boxes, and ceremonial masks for which the Northwest Coast indigenous people are famous. Follows the Middle Northwest Coast tradition, precedes the historic or proto-contact period. "								Middle Northwest Coast	5.5		"Considerable regional variablility in artefact forms, but chipped stone, ground stone, and ground bone, antler, and shell tools are found in all regions throughout this period. Pottery is absentThe most common type of site is shell midden. Shell midden sites dated to the later part of this period sometimes include rectangular house depression features of varying size, often arranged in rows. Follows the Early Northwest Coast traditon and precedes the Late Northwest Coast tradition that is generally associate with the development of ethnographic cultures.  "								Early Northwest Coast (Pebble Tool Tradition)	9.5		"Crude chopping tools made from fist-sized pebbles and associated with leaf shapped projectile points. Follows the Late Palaeo-Indian tradition in the region, precedes the Middle Northwest Coast tradition."								Paleo-Arctic	11		"Microblades, small, wedge-shaped prismatic cores, disk bifaces, leaf-shaped bifaces, burins. Precedes the Northern Archaic tradition. "																		Northwest and Canada - Western Subarctic	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0.15		"TOP of the Proto-Athapaskan (Late Northern Archaic, Late Taltheilei in East, Athapaskan, Dene)"								"Proto-Athapaskan (Late Northern Archaic, Late Taltheilei in East, Athapaskan, Dene)"	2		"Fire-cracked rock, semisubterranean house in Alaska and northern Yukon, coarse ceramics in western Alaska, native copper artefacts, bone and antler arrowheads and spear prongs, bone and stone hide-processing tools (beamers, fleshers, end-of-bone scrappers, end scarpers bits, sotne slab thi-tho scrapers, awls), large pecked and ground adzes and picks, stone spearheads, flaked arrow tips. Follows the Northwest Microblade tradition, includes the early historic period."								Northwest Microblade	7		"Microblades, end scrappers, other beveled flake scrapers, side-notched, oblanceolate, and leaf-shapped spear points, square-based and elliptical flaked knives. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition, precedes the Proto-Athapaskan tradition."								Paleo-Arctic	11		"Microblades, small, wedge-shaped prismatic cores, disk bifaces, leaf-shaped bifaces, burins. Precedes the Northern Archaic tradition. "																		Northwest and Canada - Southern Subarctic	block	150	208/217/234		off							TOP	0										Initial Shield Woodland	3		"Usually very well made, thin pottery that is grit-tempered, concoidal based, and has a smooth surface finish; when decorated, it is variously embellished in the rim areaand sometimes the upper body with circular punctates and/or nodes or bosses, discrete or dragged linear, pseudo-scallop shell, or dentate stamping or incising. The restricted placement of decoration means that the majority of the potsherds are plain. Small side-notched, corner-notched and triangular (late period) projectile points are common, as are linear flakes, ovid bifaced knives, and high frequencies of scrapers. Flakes for expedient use for tool blanks were commonly produced from small nodular cores, often employing a bipolar technique. Small quantities of copper awls, gorges, fishhooks, beada and cones have been recovered at many sites. Usually rare because of acid soils are artefacts made of bone, antler or teeth. But examples have been found of awls, gorges, and/or barbs for composite weapons, toggle-head and unilaterally barbed harpoons, beaver incisor knives and chisels, netting and snowshoe needles, and pottery stamping implements. Sites are usually small and suggest brief or seasonal occupations. Burial mounds are uncommon except in hte boundary waters area of northern Minnesota, southwestern Ontario, and southeastern Manitoba. Chronologically overlaps and then follows the Shield Archaic tradition; partially overlaps but largely precedes the historical period. "								TOP	4		Top of the Northern and Shield Archaic								Northern	6		"Leaf-shaped projectile points with wide and deep side notches and convex bases, changing to corner notched and lanceolate forms late in the tradition, unifacially flaked knives, end scrappers, and notched cobbles (presumably net sinkers). A general absence of microblade technology, present during both the preceding Palaeo-Arctic and the following Arctic Small Tool traditions, is also an important defining characteristic of the Northern Archaic tradidion. Follows the Palaeo-Archaic tradition, precedes the Western Arctic Small Tool and Eastern Arctic Small Tool traditions. "								Late Tundra	8		"Primarilly a blade and microblade industry, but at some sites there were associated bifacial projectile points/knives. With raw material common at most sites, there was not a great deal of care expended on removal of blades from cores with the exception of the Anangula blade site. When cores were reduced to microblade size in Kagati lake region, they began to assume more distinctive shapes. Microblades were conical to cylindrical in shape with multiple platforms.  Lance or leaf shaped projectile point or knife forms were produced at sites in the Kagati lake region with bifacial thinning flakes common in the debitage. Similar associations were noted at a number of other sites. Bifacial preforms were made from large flakes or derived from tabular slabs. At several sites of this tradition, burins are an important tool form. A greater array of tool forms such as fishing line weights, stone bowls, grinding pellets, ocher grinders, carved stone lamps, and small incised stone were recovered from the Anangula Blade site. Follows the Palaeoarctic and may have contributed in part to the following Northern Archaic tradition. "								Paleo-Arctic	11		"Microblades, small, wedge-shaped prismatic cores, disk bifaces, leaf-shaped bifaces, burins. Precedes the Northern Archaic tradition. "																		North America	:	N.Amer. overview	West Coast	Southwest	Plains	Eastern	_METACOLUMN_OFF															N.Amer. overview	:	Generalized N America ages																				West Coast	:	West Coast - Oregon	West Coast - Oregon Coast	West Coast - California Valley	West Coast - California Coast	West Coast - California Desert																Southwest	:	Southwest - Southern N. America	Southwest - Northern N. America	"Southwest - Eastern Great Basin Arizona, Utah, Colorado, N. Mexico)"	Southwest - Desert	Southwest - Southern Desert	Southwest event															Plains	:	Plains - Central	Plains - Northern	Plains - Woodlands	Plains Event	Mississippi Basin - Northern	Mississippi Basin - Central															Eastern	:	Eastern - Northeast	Eastern - Great Lakes Basin	Eastern - Western Midwest	Eastern Eastern Woodland																	Generalized N America ages	block	150	246/177/102	notitle	off							TOP	0										Reservations	0.15										European influence	0.4		"Culture shift with European trade (horses, beads, guns) and wars after 1600"								Late Prehistoric	1		50 yr added to Encyclopedia BP								Late Woodland	1.35		50 yr added to Encyclopedia BP								Woodland	3										Late Archaic	6										Middle Archaic	8										Early Archaic	10										Paleo-Indian	12.2																				West Coast - Oregon	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.5		Harder								Harder	2.5		"Basal and corner-notched projectile points in a wide range of sizes, some small enough to perhaps be arrow points; pentagonal chipped-stone knives; end scrapers; mortars and pestles; stone net sinkers; bone awls and needles. Follows the Tucannon tradition and precedes the historic period"								Tucaunon	5		Large triangular  stemmed and corner-notched projectile points; small side and end scrapers; mortars and pestles; stone net sinkers. Follows the Cascade tradition and precedes the Harder tradition.								Cascade	8		"Namesake willowleaf-shaped lanceolate points are the most diagnostic; the tradition also includes side-notched points, finely crafted lanceolate and triangular-shaped knives. Edge ground cobbles, tabular and keeled end scrapers, larger scraper-like tools, hammer and pounding stones, manos, and atlatl weights are also diagnostic aspects. A Levallois-like core reduction technique is also seen in Cascade sites. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes the Tucannon tradition."								Early Sierra Nevada (Early Archaic Cascades)	10		"Large to medium leaf-shaped and stemmed projectiles points, often of basalt in the Sierras, of obsidian in the Cascades, with give way to small, triangular dart points; ground stone tools such as mortars and pestles and grinding slabs and mullers; small, ephermeral settlements. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition, precedes the Late Sierra Nevada tradition. "																		West Coast - Oregon Coast	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.15		Formative Oregon Coast								Formative Oregon Coast	2		"Shell middens; rectangular plank houses; small narrow-necked and side-notched projectile points; local ceramic complex; portable stone art objects. Follows the Archaic Oregon Coast tradition, continues into early historic period. "								Late Sierra Nevada	3.8		"Thick, low-fired, unslipped, hand-molded pottery, frequently decorated with fingernail impression at rim. Triangular dart points, which give way to small, triangular arrow points. Use of steatite for beads, pendants, pipes, and bowls and dishes. Shell beads of Olivella and Detalia. Bone harpoon points and barbs for fishing gear. Hopper mortar bases, portable mortars, and bedrock mortars with pestles, shaped and cobble, with grinding slabs and mullers. House circular or oval semisubterranean pit houses. Large villages may have large dance houses or dance grounds. Follows the Early Sierra Nevada tradition, precedes contact with Europeans or Euro-Americans, which varies between 400 B.P. and 150 B.P depending on region."								Archaic Oregon Coast	10		"Lithic sites, shell middens, curvilinear pit houses, lanceolate and broadnecked projectile points. Follows the (minimally represented) Late Palaeoindian tradition, precedes the Formative Oregon Coast tradition. "																		West Coast - California Valley	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.15		"Hotchkiss (Late Horizon, Augustine Pattern)"								"Hotchkiss (Late Horizon, Augustine Pattern)"	1.5		"Both large spear points, often with serrated edges, and smaller arrow points are present. Bone harpoons and a diverse bone industry are also preasent. Ceramics and coiled basketry are both used. Burials are often in flexed position, and cremation is sometimes practised. Follows the Cosumnes tradition and precedes the historic period"								Cosumnes	3		Well-made projectile points with distinctive diagonal flaking across their faces; an extensive bone tool industry including serrated knives; distinctive shell and stone ornaments; burial usually in flexed position. Follows the Windmiller tradition and precedes the Hotchkiss tradition.								Windmiller (Early Horizon)	8		"The Windmiller peoples are the earliest known inhabitants of the California central valley. The made large leaf-shaped and stemmed projectile points, buried their dead with legs extended and pointing toward the west, often with grave goods and red ochre, and had a variety of distinctive shell and stone ornaments. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition (although it appears that the Windmiller peoples may have been the first in the California central valley), and precedes the Cosumnes tradition. "																		West Coast - California Coast	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.15		Late Southern California								Late Southern California	3		"Shell middens with sea mammals and fish remains; chert microblade drills; a great variety of Olivella biplicata beads, including saucer and other wall disk beads, lipped beads, and callus cup beads; many types of Halioris shell beads and ornaments; Megathura ring ornaments; clam cyclinder, tube, and globular beads; serpentine tubular beads; chlorite schist disk beads; large mammal tube beads; shell bead applique attached with asphaltum used to decorate bowls, mortars, and other items; shaped tapered, and cylindrical pestles; shaped globular mortars and flat-rimmed ""flower-pot"" mortars; J-shaped and circular shell fish-hooks; harpoon barbs; contracting stem dart points, small foliate and concave-based arrow points; small, side-notched arrow points in the San Diego region; steatite cooking vessels; bird bone whistles; deer tibia flutes; stone pipes; charm stones, bird stones, and incised tablets; sourthern California brown-ware; Yuman fired clay ""bow"" pipes and figurines. Follows the Early Southern California tradition and precedes the historic period."								Early Southern California	8		"Drilled rectangular beads of Olivella biplicata and abalone shell, clam disk beads, Olivella biplicata spire and base ground and/or chipped beads, serpentine beads, double-edged perforated abalone pendants, double-central-perforated abalone ornaments. Shaped bone pins of ungulate metatarsals and pone pins made from birdbone shafts. Charm stones (plummet stones) with groove near one end for suspension, cogged stones, discoidals, doughnut stones, shaped stone spheres, and fired clay cyclinders. Unnotched round-based large projectile points, large projectile points with side notches or stems, compound fishooks and bone gorges. basin and flat metates, manos of variety of types, spherical mortars, and shaped cylindrical and tapered pestles. Flexed primaryinhumations often under cairns. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition, precedes the Late southern Californian tradition"																		West Coast - California Desert	block	150	246/177/102									TOP	0.15		Late Sierra Nevada								TOP	8		San Dieguito								San Dieguito	10		"A wide range of scrapers and bifaces, including unique crescent-shaped forms; leaf-shaped points or knives; stemmed projectile points; stone-bordered ""sleeping circles"". Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition, precedes the Middle Desert Archaic tradition. "																		Southwest - Southern N. America	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	10.8		Early Paleo-Indian (Clovis)								Early Paleo-Indian (Clovis)	12.2		"Bifaces and unifacial tools such as scrapers, knives, gravers, and burins, blades struck from prepared cores, red ocher, and ground incised, cut, and flaked ivory and bone tools. Settlement patterns include the kill and scavenging sites of large herbivores, high-qualitystone procurement and workshop sites, short term habitations, base camps, caches and burials. The oldest unambiguous cultural tradition in the Americas, it precedes the Late Palaeoindian and all subsequent traditions. "																		Southwest - Northern N. America	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.45		Late Anasazi								Late Anasazi	0.75		"Grey paste ceramics, painted with black paint on a smoothed and often polished, white-slipped background, coil-impressed culinary wares; late development of polychrome decorated ceramics; surface architechture consisting of contiguous-walled structures, sometimes multistory, of masonry or adobe. Ritual architecture includes both large and small structures, some subterranean, others built above ground, all generally referred to as ""kivas"". Follows the Early Anasazi tradition and precedes the historic period."								Early Anasazi	1.35		"Settled horticulturealist living in villages of pit houses early in the period and later in small to large pueblos made of adobe or stone. Great regional variation in settlement, architecture, and artefacts, but with general pattern of well-made black on while and redware coiled pottery. Follows the Basketmaker and precedes the Late Anasazi."								TOP	6		Late Paleo-Indian (Folsom)								Late Paleo-Indian (Folsom)	11		"Projectile points differentiate the Late Palaeoindian Tradition from others and also distinguish numerous regional subtraditions in Late Palaeoindian. Unique forms include Folsom, Agate Basin,Cody, and Dalton among others. All demonstrate extraordinary  craftsmanship and a care and precision in manufacture that often goes well beyond the functional perfomance  of the point. Although the Late Palaeoindians have been the subject of extensive research, their great antiquity and relatively simple material culture have yielded only modest insights into their culture. Follows the Early Palaeoindian tradition and precedes many of the subsequent traditions of the North and Middle America"																		"Southwest - Eastern Great Basin Arizona, Utah, Colorado, N. Mexico)"	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.5		Fremont								Fremont	1.6		"Coiled; igneous, calcite, or quartzite-tempered plainwares; surface manipulation common, including a distinctive coffee bean applique; late period includes painted pottery, either black on grey or black on white, decorated with geometric designs; bowls often have fugitive red wash on exterior; unfired trapezoidal figurines, elaborate forms very similar to Basketmaker III figurines of northern Arizona; rock art includes large, trapezoidal anthropomorphic and smaller natural forms; preference for moccasins rather than sandals, one-piece hock moccasin most distinct; variety of basketry techniques, one rod and bundle construction distinct; deep trough""Utah"" metate with secondary shelf or mano rest; projectile points are regionally bound styles, which are shared with surrounding cultures: in the north, side-notched; in the south, basal-notched or concave. Settlements vary from small hamlets or rancherieas of a few pit houses, generally with above groundstructures and granaries, to larger villages with the same features. Follows the Late Archaic tradition, precedes the historic period."								Basketmaker	2.3										Basketmaker II	3		"A polythetic suit of characteristics typifies Basketmaker cultural manifestations. The suite includes distinctive, side notched dart points, the atlatle, two-rod-and-bundle basketry technology, scalloped toed sandles, elaborate funerary assemblages, a variety of subterranean storage cist types, and a widely distributed rock art style distinguished by the presence of anthropomorphic figures with wide, square bodies and shoulders slightly wider than the hips. Fall between the Middle Desert Archaic and Early Anasazi traditions."								"Middle Desert Archaic (Southwest Archaic, Western Archaic)"	8		"Stemmed, lanceolate, corner-notched and side notched projectile points. Basin metates and one-handed manos. Split-twig figurines, rod and bundle basketry, and hunting nets. Houses are small (2-3m in diameter) and roun, storage pits often bell shaped. Settlements with mulitple dwellings include examples with hundreds of structures by the end of the Archaic (2900-1600 B.P.) in southern Arizona. Follows the Early Desert Archaic tradition, precedes the Late Desert Archaic tradition. "								TOP	8		Early Desert Archaic								Early Desert Archaic	10		"Stemmed projectile points, flat milling stones, hand stones. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition, precedes the Middle Archaic tradition. "																		Southwest - Desert	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.5		Late Hohokam								Late Hohokam	0.95		"Red on buff and polished and smudged red and plain ware pottery, often tempered with angular micaceoud schist. Craft arts include worked marine shell, turquoise inlay, and clay effigies. Residential architechture consists of rectangular pit houses and surface structures constructed of puddled and coursed adobe and sometimes rock. Village layouts may include plazas and courtyards, either enclosed or surrounded by walled, quadrilateral compounds, with houses grouped in clusters. Public architecture consists of platform mounds, multistoried great houses, and towers, usually enclosed by compounds. The core area contains extensive irrigation systems. Burial practises include inhumation and cremation. Follows the Early Hohokam tradition and precedes the historic period. "								Late Desert Archaic (Proto-Numic)	1.6		"Small, triangular projectile points, usuallyside notched and sometimes with an additional basal notch. Simple brown-ware ceramics in far forms, usually with pointed or sharply rounded bases. Follows the Middle Desert Archaic tradition and precedes the historic period."								Early Hohokam	2		"Distictive red on buff ceramics; oval ball courts; shallow pit houses: canal irrigation systems and (perhaps) ""capped"" or surfaced trash mounds; also distinctive molcajetes, comales, tripods, palettes, and censers. Follows the Middle Desert Archaic tradition and precedes the Late Hohokam tradition. "																		Southwest - Southern Desert	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.5		"Patayan (Hakataya, Proto-Yuman)"								TOP	0.6	Dashed	Late Mogollon								Late Mogollon	1.05	Dashed	"Pueblo village layout focusing inward on a plaza; rectangular kivas in room blocks; primary extended inhumation of the deceased; vertical-occipital head deformation; three-quarter grooved ax; brown plain potter, interior smudging, and brown corrugated pottery often with patterned incised, or painted designs imitating those on baskets. Follows the Early and Middle High Plains Archaic tradition and precedes the historic period. "								"Patayan (Hakataya, Proto-Yuman)"	1.6		"Patayan ceramics (Lower Colorado buffware) are the sole diagnostic attribute. Little else is known about this tradition because of both lack of research and the likelihood that many sites are buried beneath alluvial deposits.Follows the Middle Desert Archaic tradition, precedes the historic period."								Early Mogollon	2		"Brown-ware coiled pottery, some with red wash or slip; small villages of pit houses. The Early Mogollon tradition was preceded by the Picosa tradition and followed by the Late Mogollon tradition."																		Southwest event	event		197/217/234		off						FAD												Polvoron	0.625										Civano 	0.7										Soho	0.8										Santan	0.95										Colonial period	1.175										Late Pithouse period	1.45		May have began as late as 1350 B.P.								Late Basketmaker	2										Early Pithouse period	2										Pioneer period	2										Early Basketmaker (White Dog phase)	3										Trincheras	3		"Trincheras is Mexican culture, but derived from Middle Desert Archaic"							LAD												Polvoron	0.5										Civano 	0.6										Soho	0.7										Santan	0.8										Colonial period	0.9										Late Pithouse period	1										Pioneer period	1.15										Early Pithouse period	1.45		May have ended as late as 1350 B.P.								Late Basketmaker	1.5										Early Basketmaker (White Dog phase)	2																				Plains - Central	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.15		Central Plains Village								Central Plains Village	1.1		"Small villages of earth lodges located primarily in river bottoms. Sand-tempered, cord-marked potter, usually in large globular forms with constricting necks, and often with small handles attached to the rims. Small, triangular projectile points, usually side-notched. Follows the Plains Woodland tradition, precedes the historic period."								TOP	2.5										Plains Archaic	9		"Artefacts assemblages from Plains Archaic sties are generally recognised by, indeed too frequently restricted to, lithic artefacts. Diagnostic chipped stone tools include a variety of lanceolate points/knives. Other common artefacts are chipped-stone axes and gouges, T-shaped drills, and scrapers. The latter include unifacial or bifacial tools with hafting elements. A typical ground-stone inventory includes ovoid and rectangular manos and nutting stone, full or three quarter grooved axes, and celts. Sites are generally small, seasonally occupied or extensive, cyclically occupied camps. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes the Plains Woodland tradition. "																		Plains - Northern	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.15		"High Plains Late Prehistoric (Avonlea, Late Woodland, Old Women's)"								Northern Plains Village	1		"Thin, grit-tempered, globular pottery, usually with cord-roughened, smoothed over cord, or smooth body, by later simple and checked stamping. Rims are usually outflaring, some with added straps or handles. Most rim decoration is incised. Small triangular projectile points. Rectangular wattle and daub houses with Middle Missouri, changing to circular earth lodges, often in fortified villages. Follows, but partly concurrent with, the Plains Woodland tradition, precedes the historic period. "								"High Plains Late Prehistoric (Avonlea, Late Woodland, Old Women's)"	1.5		"Small side-notched projectile points indicative of the use of the bow and arrow. Thin walled ceramics in generally globular forms, with cord marking or smoothed-over cord marking a common surface treatment, incised lines or punctates around the rim a common decorative treatment. Follows the Late High Plains Archaic tradition and precedes the historic period"								High Plains Late Archaic	3		"Large side notched dart projectile points and Woodland pottery (Besant), large corner-notched projectile points (Pelican Lake), large corner to side notched projectile points with a basal indentation or notch (Yonkee), and Woodland pottery associated wtih Besant projectile points. Follows the Middle High Plains Archaic tradition, precedes the High Plains Late Prehistoric tradition."								High Plains Early and Middle Archaic	8		The primary attribute distinguishing Early and Middle High Plains Archaic from the Late Palaeoindian tradition is the development of side-notched projectile points. A number of distinctive projectile point styles are diagnostic of the tradition. Pit houses and stone-filled pit ovens are also characteristic attributes of this tradition. The absence of ceramics is another diagnosic attribute. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes the Late High Plains Archaic tradition.																		Plains - Woodlands	block	150	246/177/102									TOP	0.2		Plains Woodland								Plains Woodland	2.5		"The fundamental diagnostic is cord-marked or cord-roughened pottery tempered with sand or crushed materials such as burned rock (grit), fired clay (grog), or bone. Plains Woodland components would often be difficult to distinguish from Plains Archaic  but for the presence of potsherds assignable to Plains Woodland wares and types. There are also several dozen named types of diagnostic projectile points that are used for cultural cross-dating. These diagnostic rands from a number of types of large and small corner-notched and side-notched dart points made diruing Early and Middle Plains Woodland to small notched and stemmed arrow points made during Late Plains Woodland. The occasional presence of artefacts reflecting Hopewellian influences also indicates Middle Plains Woodland. In some eastern portions of the plains, conical and linear earthen mounds were constructed, again reflecting influences emanating from mound-building cultures of the eastern woodlands. Follows Plains Archaic and precedes the Plains Village tradition or the historic period depending on region. "																		Plains Event	event		197/217/234		off						FAD												Plains horsemen	0.4		"Culture shift with European trade (horses, beads, guns) and wars after 1600"																		Mississippi Basin - Northern	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.35										Fort Ancient	1										TOP	1.7		Hopewell (mound builders)								Hopewell (mound builders)	2.1		"Thin, shell tempered pottery, often decorated with incising, stamping, or slipping. Small, triangular projectile points. Rectangular wattle and daub houses, often arranged linearly. Settlement patterns include some communities with flat topped pyramidal mounds. Follows the Late Eastern Woodland tradition, precedes the historic period."								Adena	2.6		"Grit-tempered, cord marked pottery. Stemmed and corner-notched projectile points in distinctive Hopewellian styles. Conical burial mounds containing distinctive grit-tempered ceramics with elaborate stamped and incised decoration, copper ornaments, ground stone pipes, gorgets, and atlatl weights, imported stone (especially obsidian) and minerals, and other exotic goods. Follows the Early Eastern Woodland tradition and overlaps with the Adena tradition, precedes the Late Eastern Woodland traditions. "																		Mississippi Basin - Central	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.5		Mississippian (Middle Mississippian)								Mississippian (Middle Mississippian)	1.1		"Grit-, limestone-, and/or shell-tempered pottery, generally cord marked or plain, sometimes roughened or simple stamped, and sometimes decorated with incised designs. Small triangular projectile points, chipped limestone disks, and bifacial ""teardrop-shaped"" end scrapers. Rectangular houses of single post or wall trench construction. Small to large clusters of households or circular villages with central plazas; sometimes low burial mounds. Deep bell-shaped pits at villages along major rivers. Domesticated beans. European trade items occur in protohistoric graves and by the 18th century, in domestic trash.  Follows the Late Eastern Woodland tradition, precedes the historic period. "																		Eastern - Northeast	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.5		Northeast Late Woodland								Northeast Late Woodland	1.05		"Globular pottery, often collared. Earlier specimens grit tempered and decorated with cord-wrapped-stick impressions. Later specimens sometimes shell tempered and usually decorated with incised patterns. Small triangular  arrow points. Bark houses: dome wigwams in Algonquian areas, arched longhouses in Iroquoian areas. "								Northeast Middle Woodland	2.4		"In the Middle Woodland, coil-manufacture pottery with collarless rims, cord impressed, dentate stamped and pseudo-scalloped-shell decoration applied in linear patterns, changing to paddle manufactured pottery with cord-wrapped stick impressed linear decoration in the Late Woodland; a variety of side and corner notched projectile  point types such as Jack's Reef in the Middle of Woodland, changing to triangular points such as Levannna in the Initial Late Woodland. "								Eastern North America Early Woodland	3		"Thick, course, grit-tempered pottery, decorated with incised lines and punctations. Stemmed projectile points, side notched and corner notched, plus triangular points. Tubular ceramic and stone pipes. A variety of food resources utilised, both plant and animal, including domesticated plants at some locations. Settlement patterns  include some communities with associated mounds for burials. "								Eastern North America Late Archaic	6		"Stemmed and notched hafted bifaces; extensive ground-stone technology; diverse bone and antler technology; grooved axes; spear-thrower weights; soapstone vessels; fibre-tempered pottery in the southeast; ground-slate technology in the northeast; lapidary industry and baked clay objects in Poverty Point subtradition. Long distance exchange of chert, marine shell, and copper in some subregions. Earthen and/or shell mounds in the midsouth and Florida. Red ochre burials in the north. Subsistence economy includes shellfish explotation in most subtraditions; domesticated cucurbita and weedy  annuals in midcontinent; marine mammals and swordfish in the far northeast. Storage pit technology in most subtraditions. "								Eastern North America Middle Archaic	8		"Stemmed hafted bifaces, cyclindrical and semilunate spear-thrower weights, and plummets, semilunar knives, and gouges in limited areas. Subsistence economy included shellfish exploitation late in the period. "								Eastern North America Early Archaic	10		"Three roughly time-sequential styles in point types are recognised: side-notched, corner-notched,  and bifurcate-based points. Side-notched points are small to medium sized bifaces with triangular and often alternately beveled blades. Moreover they exhibit small U-shaped  side-notcheds with squared or recurved basal edges. Corner-notched types are small to medium sized points exhibiting narrow but deep U-shaped corner notches. Point bases are straight to slightly excurvate and sometimes ground. Blade shapes are roughly triangular with straight to slightly excurvate blade margins that are commonly serrated and sometimes alternatelybeveled. Finally bifurcate forms are usually very small bifaces with short triangular blades and either shallow side-notched or short, stemmed bases that exhibit a shallow notch or bifurcation. "																		Eastern - Great Lakes Basin	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.5		Eastern North America Late Woodland								Proto-Iroquois (Algonquian and Iroquoian language cultures)	1		"Thin walled, usually grit tempered globular pots with necks and applied  collars with incised decoration and castellations, punctations, and/or notches. Ceramic smoking pipes of several forms: elbow (early), trumpet (middle), and effigy (late). Isoceles-triangular projectile points of the Madison type. Finely carved bone and shell ornaments. Polished ground-stone celts for tree felling. Settlement patterns are typically villages consisting of clusters of longhouses surrounded by palisades sited on defensible locations. Ossuary burials  are common in Ontario and western New York during the later phases. "																		Eastern - Western Midwest	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.23		Oneota								Oneota	1.05		"Remains of shell-tempered, globular ceramic jars with outward-flaring rims and trailed line decoation; in late sites, work in red pipe stone, especially disk shaped tobacco pipes and tablets. Triangular arrow points, deep storage pits, large village clusters, cemetery burial, and evidence of a diverse farming-hunting-gathering subsistence base. "																		Eastern Eastern Woodland	block	150	246/177/102		off							TOP	0.15										Eastern North America Late Woodland	1.35		"Grit-tempered, cord marked ceramic cooking vessels in the northern region of the eastern woodlands, and ground shell, limestone or grog tempered vessels in the southern woodlands. A wide variety of projectile point forms were utilised during the Late Woodland period, ranging from small stemmed points early in the period, to notched and unnotched triangular forms after the introduction of the bow and arrow. House forms show a wide range of variation from the longhouse of the northeastern United States to the circular and ovid forms of the western Great Lakes to rectangular square and ovid forms of the southeastern United States. "																													Middle America	:	Middle America overview	Mexico	Central America	NW South America																	Middle America overview	:	Generalized Mid-America ages																				Mexico	:	Mexico - Northern	Mexico - Western	Mexico - Southern	Mexico - Central	Mexico - Highland	Mexico event															Central America	:	Central Amerca - Pacific and Gulf	Central Amerca - Eastern	Central America event	Caribbean - Mainland Coast	Caribbean - Islands																NW South America	:	NW South America - Coast	NW South America - Sothern Middle America																			Generalized Mid-America ages	block	150	206/177/222	notitle								TOP	0										New Spain	0.479										Aztec	0.6		Spanish conquests 1521-1535 AD. Source = MET Timeline								Mayan	1.85		Encyclopedia gives 750 BP (relative to 1950?) for beginning of Aztec; but WebChron gives 1400 AD for beginning of Empire (used here)								TOP	2.1										Olmec	3.4										Archaic	7		"Monolithic basalt sculpture in the form of heads and thrones; sculptures with feline themes; coarse and medium black wares decorated with excised motifs (crosses, abstract felines, and dragons); fine white potter; distinctively carved jade objects. Massive earthen constructions in the form of pyramids and extensively modified terraces, "								Early Archaic	9.6																				Mexico - Northern	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.45		Trincheras								TOP	0.5	Dashed	Huatabampo								Aztec Empire	0.6		Encyclopedia gives 750 BP (relative to 1950?) for beginning of Aztec; but WebChron gives 1400 AD for beginning of Empire (used here)								Toltec	1.3										Huatabampo	1.8		"Huatabampo red ware, coffee-bean eye solid ceramic figurines, coastal shell middens, carved shell ornaments, stone and shell mosaics, spindle whorls, overhanging manos, three-quarter grooved axes, small stone palattes. Follows and partially overlaps the Trincheras tradition, precedes the historic period."								Trincheras	3		"The term Trincheras currently has two separate referents in the archaeology of the Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico. Cerros de Trincheras are defined by dry-laid masonry walls and stone terraces on isolated hills scattered over a wide region encompassing northern Sonora, southern Arizona, northwestern Chihuahua, and southwestern New Mexico spanning nearly 2500 years beginning about 3000 B.P. A Trincheras ceramic complex, including both plain and purple on red painted waters, is found over an area of north-central Sonora that only partially overlaps with the distribution of Cerros de Trincheras in time arid space. Trincheras ceramics are generally thought to equate time and to some extent style with the Preclassic Hohokam (1500-800 B.P.), although recent work suggests that this ceramic period contines as late as 450 B.P. Follows the Middle Desert Archaic tradition (North America), precedes the historic period. "								Highland Mesoamerican Early Preclassic	4		"Ceramics come in a wide range of foms including globular jars, bottles and tecomeates; decoration includes slips, grooving, carving, incising, and rocker stamping. Olmec design elements include double-line break, fire serpent, were-jaguar, paw-wing motifs. Handmade figurines are abundant, coming in a wide variety of forms, often with slanted or perforated eyes. Lithics including grinding stones, and chipped-stone tools such as knives, scrapers, and small, often stemless projectile points. Both chipping and core-blade techiques used to make cutting tools from obsidian. Certain jade and ceramic figures depict baby-faced individuals with downturned mouths. Rectangular wattle and daub houses, often arranged around open plazas. Settlement patterns often have a settlement hierarchy with civic-ceremonial platform mounds appearing in important sites.  Follows the Highland Mesoamerican Archaic and precedes the Late Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic."								Highland Mesoamerican Archaic	7		"Large, stemmed projectile points are found, but undiagnostic flake tools and crude scappers dominate archaeological assemblages. Ceramics were not made. Domesticated plants are first developed during this tradition and become fairly common by the end of the tradition. Sedentary communities also make their first appearance and become more common by the end of the tradition. Follows the Early Mesoamerican Archaic tradition and precedes the Early Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition. "								Early Mesoamerican Archaic	9.6		"Chipped atlatl points with specialised stem or basal features, use of ground-and pecked-stoned tools, increase in carrying loops, nets, bags, and baskets for collecting, a variety of types of cords and weaving mats and textiles (plant), large scraping and chopping chipped tools, increase in woodworking, the development of seasonal scheduled subsistence system, micro-macroband settlement patterns, perhaps band social organization with some complex (burial) religious practice that were unique to Mesoamerica. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes all later Mesoamerican traditions. "																		Mexico - Western	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.48		West Mexico Postclassic								West Mexico Postclassic	1.1		"Red-slipped buff coloured pottery often decorated with white, red, and/or cream paint, with common use of resist decoration. Ceramic pipes are widespread, and metallurgy including bronze alloys is used to create tools, ritual, and status-marking artefacts. Settlements include some communities with public buildings clustered around plazas with pyramids, ball courts, and elite residences with plastered walls and floors, often located in defensible or fortified positions. Follows the West Mexico Classic tradition, precedes the Spanish Colonial period. "								West Mexico Classic	1.8		"Recent studies have demonstrated the existence of a signal variety of monumental architecture, large settlement and irrigation systems, high demographic profiles craft specialization, a possible ideographic glyphic system, and other firm markers of complex social systems in certain parts of western Mexico long before the beginning of the Postclassic. Follows the Late highland Mesoamerican Preclassic and Trincheras traditions, precedes West Mexico Postclassic tradition. "								Highland Mesoamerican Early Preclassic	4		"Ceramics come in a wide range of foms including globular jars, bottles and tecomeates; decoration includes slips, grooving, carving, incising, and rocker stamping. Olmec design elements include double-line break, fire serpent, were-jaguar, paw-wing motifs. Handmade figurines are abundant, coming in a wide variety of forms, often with slanted or perforated eyes. Lithics including grinding stones, and chipped-stone tools such as knives, scrapers, and small, often stemless projectile points. Both chipping and core-blade techiques used to make cutting tools from obsidian. Certain jade and ceramic figures depict baby-faced individuals with downturned mouths. Rectangular wattle and daub houses, often arranged around open plazas. Settlement patterns often have a settlement hierarchy with civic-ceremonial platform mounds appearing in important sites.  Follows the Highland Mesoamerican Archaic and precedes the Late Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic."								Highland Mesoamerican Archaic	7		"Large, stemmed projectile points are found, but undiagnostic flake tools and crude scappers dominate archaeological assemblages. Ceramics were not made. Domesticated plants are first developed during this tradition and become fairly common by the end of the tradition. Sedentary communities also make their first appearance and become more common by the end of the tradition. Follows the Early Mesoamerican Archaic tradition and precedes the Early Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition. "								Early Mesoamerican Archaic	9.6		"Chipped atlatl points with specialised stem or basal features, use of ground-and pecked-stoned tools, increase in carrying loops, nets, bags, and baskets for collecting, a variety of types of cords and weaving mats and textiles (plant), large scraping and chopping chipped tools, increase in woodworking, the development of seasonal scheduled subsistence system, micro-macroband settlement patterns, perhaps band social organization with some complex (burial) religious practice that were unique to Mesoamerica. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes all later Mesoamerican traditions. "																		Mexico - Southern	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0										Postclassic Southern Mexican Highlands (Postclassic Oaxaca)	1.05		"Utilitarian ceramic serving bowls tend to be more hemispherical and rounded in form than early utilitarian bowls. Finer ceramic composition in general with many vessels having grey or tan paste. Polychrome pottery. Effigy supports head or feet, resembling deer hooves, snake heads, bat heads. Small triangular  projectile points. metal ornaments found in high-status contexts. Mixtec codices. Follows the Southern Mexican Highlands Classic tradition and preceeds the Contact/Colonial period. "								TOP	1.25										Southern Mexican Highland Classic	1.75		"Utilitarian ceramic vessels constitute the major diagnostic artefacts for this tradition, although there is considerable diversity in ceramic form, colour and decoration over the whole Southern Highlands Classic tradition. The valley of Oaxaca and adjacent areas are characterised by the development of what is called Zapotec ceramic tradition, featuring a preponderance of grey ware, which have coarse, roughly scraped exterior surfaces. Other diagnostics of the Zapotec ceramic tradition include a bowl with external incised designs (Early Classic) and anthropomorphic vessels referred to as Zapotec urns (Early and Late Classic, as well as other periods. Bowls with bean applique design and hollow slab support, as well as thin orange bowls; found exclusively at Monte Alban. In the Nochiztlan Valley, and adjacent areas of the Mixteca region, have ceramics with tan, fine cream, rust or orange pastes. Houses typically consisted of one or more rectanglur or square rooms, often built around an open central patio. Households of higher social position had rooms that were elevated several feet above the patio. In other cases, the whole house was elevated on platforms, with a staircase for access. Burials were placed in and around houses, some in slablined graves or roofed tombs. Tombs varied from rectangular to cruciform. Tombs of important people might include stone-lined niches for offerings and elaborate mural scenes and writing rendered in painted and carved stone. Of the public buildings, many categories were on elevated platforms, such as two-chambered temples and civic buildings. Both were built in relation to an ajoining plaza, which could be open or enclosed by multiple compounds. Additionally, carved stones and murals that use Zapotec writing and other symbols are diagnostic. These murals usually consist  of scenes potraying elite and are accompanied by texts that include hierogylphic and phoetic written elements. Writing aimed at public communication declined by the Late Classic period. Follows the Late Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition, preceedes the Postclassic Southern Mexican Highlands tradition."								Gulf Coast Classic (Classic Veracruz)	2.05		"Diverse regional ceramic types, many characterised by bichrome and polychrome painting, primarily in red, black and white, and especially in the south, untempered orange and grey pastes. Several figurine styles, including earlier modeled sharp-nosed narigudo figurines, and, later, mold-made hollow, white-slipped figurines. Animal figures with wheels and smiling faces figures are particularly distinctive elements of the Gulf Coast Classic. A tradition of large, lifelike ceramic and unfired clay statues was centered in the lower Papaloapan basin. Figurines and statues are often detailed with asphaltum paint. Stone carving includes representations of ball-game paraphernalia: U-shaped yokes, hachas in the form of thing human faces, and long, curved palmas. Typical of north-central Veracruz is a low-relief sculptural style emphasizing wide, interlaced scrolls. In south-central and southern Veracruz, Protoclassic and Early Classic, stone stalae sometimes bear epi-Olmec hieroglyphic texts and Long Count dates. Ceramic and architechtural traits derived from Central Mexico define a Middle Classic horizon in many sites. The ceramic traits include cylindrical tripod jars, articulated figurines with triangular heads, small rectangular or ellipitcal artefacts with one or two holes (candeleros), Talud-tablero architecture appears at Matacapan in modified form El Tajin and related sites. Settlements include primary, seconary, and on occasion, tertiary centers as well as hamlets, villages, and special purpose extractive sites. Centers contain pyramidal temples, range structures, ball courts, and broad platforms arranged around plazas. These structures are typically stone faced over a rubble core in the north and primarily of earthen consturction in the south. Follows the Olmec tradition, precedes the Central Mexico Postclassic tradition. Encompasses the Protoclassic, Early Classic, Middle Classic, Late Classic or Epiclassic, and Early Postclassic periods. "								Olmec	3.4		"Monolithic basalt sculpture in the form of heads and thrones; sculptures with feline themes; coarse and medium black wares decorated with excised motifs (crosses, abstract felines, and dragons); fine white potter; distinctively carved jade objects. Massive earthen constructions in the form of pyramids and extensively modified terraces. Overlaps the Early Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition and precedes the Gulf Coast Classic tradition. "								Highland Mesoamerican Early Preclassic	4		"Ceramics come in a wide range of foms including globular jars, bottles and tecomeates; decoration includes slips, grooving, carving, incising, and rocker stamping. Olmec design elements include double-line break, fire serpent, were-jaguar, paw-wing motifs. Handmade figurines are abundant, coming in a wide variety of forms, often with slanted or perforated eyes. Lithics including grinding stones, and chipped-stone tools such as knives, scrapers, and small, often stemless projectile points. Both chipping and core-blade techiques used to make cutting tools from obsidian. Certain jade and ceramic figures depict baby-faced individuals with downturned mouths. Rectangular wattle and daub houses, often arranged around open plazas. Settlement patterns often have a settlement hierarchy with civic-ceremonial platform mounds appearing in important sites.  Follows the Highland Mesoamerican Archaic and precedes the Late Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic."								Highland Mesoamerican Archaic	7		"Large, stemmed projectile points are found, but undiagnostic flake tools and crude scappers dominate archaeological assemblages. Ceramics were not made. Domesticated plants are first developed during this tradition and become fairly common by the end of the tradition. Sedentary communities also make their first appearance and become more common by the end of the tradition. Follows the Early Mesoamerican Archaic tradition and precedes the Early Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition. "								Early Mesoamerican Archaic	9.6		"Chipped atlatl points with specialised stem or basal features, use of ground-and pecked-stoned tools, increase in carrying loops, nets, bags, and baskets for collecting, a variety of types of cords and weaving mats and textiles (plant), large scraping and chopping chipped tools, increase in woodworking, the development of seasonal scheduled subsistence system, micro-macroband settlement patterns, perhaps band social organization with some complex (burial) religious practice that were unique to Mesoamerica. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes all later Mesoamerican traditions. "																		Mexico - Central	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.429		Central Mexico Postclassic								Central Mexico Postclassic	1.3		"Pottery varied over time and area, and major styles and traditions included Coyotlatelco, Mazapan, Toltec, Choluteca, Matlazinca, Tlahuica, and Aztec. Pottery was made in a variety of forms, often using molds;  common forms include bowls, jars, basins, ladle-censers, griddles, and tripod dishes with scored bottoms used to grind chiles and tomatoes. Other ceramics included salt wares for transporting salt, moldmade figurines and spindle whorls, and small tripod bowls to support spindles during cotton spinning. Pottery with polished painted red surfaces was common. Decorated serving wares increased in frequency in the Late Postclassic, including Aztec III Black on Orange that was manufactured in multiple production centers in the Basin of Mexico and widely exchanged. Prismatic obsidian blades made from polyhedral cores were the common cutting tool. Postclassic monumental architectural forms included ball courts, skull racks, and colonnaded halls. Terraced pyramids with double stairsways and twin temples developed in the Middle Postclassic. Settlement patterns were complex and hierarchical, and during the Postclassic they underwent cycles of centralization and fragmentation. The Late Postclassic is distinguished by the largest population of any prehispanic period in Central Mexico, a high density of rural, as well as urban, settlements, and a hierarchy of urban centers, including city-state capitals, conquest state capitals, and the surpraregional Aztec imperial city of Tenochtitlan-Tlatelolco. Follows the Central Mexico Classic period, precedes the historic period."								Central Mexico Classic (Teotihuacan)	2.15		"There is a distinctive loack ceramic tradition, most elements of which do not spread far beyond the basin of Mexico, including storage, cooking, and serving types such as ollas, basins, caraters, and cazuelas, flat-bottomed serving bowls with outcurving sides and nubin supports, and a distinctive utility ware called San Martin Orange. Composite ""theater"" type censers of the Teotihuacan inspiration are well known in highland Pacific coastal Guatemala, and distinctive little twin-chambered censers called candeleros are present in some numbers at Matacapan in southern Veracruz and occur sparsely elsewhere in Mesoamerica. Direct rim cyclinder tripod vases were important at Teotihuacan after about 1700 B.P., but the form probably originated in the Gulf lowlands and has many variants. Thin Orange is a distinctive ware made in southern Puebla. Teotihuacan also has a distinctive architectural style. Civic-ceremonial structures and even platforms in residential compounds often consist of a sloping apron (talud) at the base, surmounted by a vertical recessed panel (tablero). Higher structures often have two to seven stacked talu-tablero levels, each smaller than the one below, so that the overall effect is pyramidal. Some pyramids, however, were built wholly or partly of single or stacked talud elements, without verticle panels. Residential structures at least after about 1750 B.P., is composed of very distinctive walled compounds, each containing several single-story apartments. Each apartment is typically focused on a small central patio. Often a larger patio with a central altar seems to pertain to the compound as a whole. Especially around the main patio, there were often low talud-tablero platforms supporting rooms with porticoes facing the patio. Follows the Late Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition and precedes the Central Mexico Postclassic tradition. "																		Mexico - Highland	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	1.6		Highland Mesoamerican Late Preclassic								Highland Mesoamerican Late Preclassic	2.6		"Calendrical and other hieroglyphic inscripitions in stone are one form of monumental art. Both well-made and more crudely manufactured pottery of varying pastes, tempering, and firing treatments, some decorated with molding, incising, excising, raspada, slipping, and/or paint. Highly variable range of functional categories and pottery vessel forms. Rectangular houses vary from modest single-room structures of wattle and daub of adobe brick, with associated exterior work areas and features, to large multiroom masonry dwellings atop platform mounds and arranged around tightly enclosed courtyards. Settlement patterns include a hierarchy of settlement sizes, a range of site types based on monumental and high status residential architecture, and the emergence of the first true cities in Mesoamerica. Follows the Early Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition and precedes the Central Mexico Classic and Southern Mexico Highlands Classic traditions. "								Highland Mesoamerican Early Preclassic	4		"Ceramics come in a wide range of foms including globular jars, bottles and tecomeates; decoration includes slips, grooving, carving, incising, and rocker stamping. Olmec design elements include double-line break, fire serpent, were-jaguar, paw-wing motifs. Handmade figurines are abundant, coming in a wide variety of forms, often with slanted or perforated eyes. Lithics including grinding stones, and chipped-stone tools such as knives, scrapers, and small, often stemless projectile points. Both chipping and core-blade techiques used to make cutting tools from obsidian. Certain jade and ceramic figures depict baby-faced individuals with downturned mouths. Rectangular wattle and daub houses, often arranged around open plazas. Settlement patterns often have a settlement hierarchy with civic-ceremonial platform mounds appearing in important sites.  Follows the Highland Mesoamerican Archaic and precedes the Late Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic."								Highland Mesoamerican Archaic	7		"Large, stemmed projectile points are found, but undiagnostic flake tools and crude scappers dominate archaeological assemblages. Ceramics were not made. Domesticated plants are first developed during this tradition and become fairly common by the end of the tradition. Sedentary communities also make their first appearance and become more common by the end of the tradition. Follows the Early Mesoamerican Archaic tradition and precedes the Early Highland Mesoamerican Preclassic tradition. "								Early Mesoamerican Archaic	9.6		"Chipped atlatl points with specialised stem or basal features, use of ground-and pecked-stoned tools, increase in carrying loops, nets, bags, and baskets for collecting, a variety of types of cords and weaving mats and textiles (plant), large scraping and chopping chipped tools, increase in woodworking, the development of seasonal scheduled subsistence system, micro-macroband settlement patterns, perhaps band social organization with some complex (burial) religious practice that were unique to Mesoamerica. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes all later Mesoamerican traditions. "																		Mexico event	event		197/217/234		off						FAD												Late Postclassic	0.6										Middle Postclassic	0.8										Early Postclassic	1										Epiclassic	1.3										Late Classic (Southerm Mexican Highland Classic)	1.5										Early classic	1.6										Early Classic (Southerm Mexican Highland Classic)	1.75										Protoclassic	2.05		"The corresponding period in the Nochiztlan valley, in the Mixteca region, northwest of the central valleys, is the Las Flores phase (1700-1000 B.P.). The major languages were Zapotec in the valley of Oaxaca and Mixtec in the Mixteca Alta, alhtough other languages were, and still are, spoken in the Southern Highlands. "							LAD												Late Postclassic	0.429										Middle Postclassic	0.6										Early Postclassic	0.8										Epiclassic 	1										Early classic	1.3										Early Classic (Southerm Mexican Highland Classic)	1.5										Protoclassic	1.65																				Central Amerca - Pacific and Gulf	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.5		"Nicoya, Coahuilan"								Nicoya	3.6		"Early and middle Formative period incised, shell-tempered, and bichrome ceramics have no known local antecedents and are most similar to the Barra and Ocos complexes of southeastern Mesoamerica. The Greater Nicoya ceramic complex had some important type-variety distinctions between the Rivas and Nicoya peninsula subtraditions, primarily white slipped ceramics in Rivas and tan-orange slipped ceramics in Nicoya from 1200-750 B.P. Pertroglyphs are found in areas with natural boulders, naturally formed stone platforms, or rock outcrops. Obsidian flakes and blades were imported from 1200 B.C. on, from Honduras to Guatemala, and are more common in the Rivas subtradition than in the Nicoya peninsula, and in both subtraditions are combined with expedient local chert, jasper, chalcedony, and basalt-andesite industries. Because of historical, environmental, and geographical differences between the two subtraditions, other dimensions of the cultural tradition are better characterised as being more typical of one subtradition or the other. Primary settlements in the Rivas subtradition is near the shores of lake Nicaragua and Managua, whereas Nicoya peninsula subtradition they are along the coast and in Tempisque river valley; jade artefacts are most common in the Nicoya subtradition and obsidian in the Rivas. Follows the Late Northwest South American Littoral tradition, precedes the historic period. "								Coahuilan	8		"Well-developed fibre industry, a variety of stone tools with chronological implication, rock shelter and open occupation sites, regionally specific petroglyph and pictograph styles. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes the historic period. Encompasses the period from the end of the Pleistocene until European contact and subsumes the early Cienagas complex, and later Jora comlex, as well as the mortuary Mayan complex. "																		Central Amerca - Eastern	block	150	206/187/222		off							Top	0.479		Top of Mayan								Postclassic Maya	1.1		"Major attributes include architechtural features, settlement characteristics, and pottery types. The architechtural features include both public and domestic constructions. New public architechtural features include colonnades halls, many with beam and plaster roofs. Round public buildings like the observatory at Chichen Itza are more common, although some have been dated to the Late and Terminal Classic Maya. I-shaped ball courts and four stairway temples are other features more common in the Postclassic than Classic. A major common feature in many areas is the building or range-type structure with C-chaped benches. Adoratorios and small square shrines are also major Postclassic architectural features. Pottery styles tend to be regionally specific. Perhaps the most common ceramic markers are the widespread use of both spiked hourglass unslipped censers (Chehach-Hunacti composite) and effigy censers (Chen Mul molded). Stylistic characteristics include bell-shaped and tripod feet in red-slipped dishes and bowls. Widely traded serving wares that date to this horizon include Parbellon modelled-carved and other fine paste orange wares dating to the Terminal Classic and early Postclassic and Silho and other fine orangewares dating to the Postclassic. Another imported time horizon marker is Plumbate ware imported from the Guatemalan-Chiapan borderland. Follows the Classic Maya tradition, precedes the historic period. "								Classic Maya	1.85		"(Lowlands): Masonry architecture with corbeled vaulting, carved stone monuments (stelae and alters) with calendrical dates, hieroglyphic writing (folded books, text on monuments, buildings, and artefacts), polychrome pottery. Follows the Preclassic Maya tradition and precedes the Postclassic Maya tradition. "								Preclassic Maya	3.8		"Simple monochrome and bichrome pottery comes in a range of forms, including composite bowls, globular jars, tripod vessels, and effigy whistling vessels. Decorative techniques include fluting, grooving, punctation, rocker-stamping,  and incised geometric designs. Handmade figurines come in a variety of forms, often with very crude arms and legs. Chert and obsidian were processed into a variety of knives, scrapers, and stemless or tapered-stem projectile points. Residences are generallyof rectangular wattle-and-daub construction; at times they occur in clustered groups of three to five structures arranged around an open plaza. Follows the Lowland Mesoamerican Archaic tradition, preceeds the Classic Maya tradition. "								Lowland Mesoamerican Archaic	7		"Chert microblades, Lowe dart points, coastal shell middens, fibre-tempered pottery. Follows the Early Mesoamerican Archaic tradition, precedes the Preclassic Maya tradition. "																		Central America event	event		197/217/234		off						FAD												Terminal Classic	1.2										Late Classic	1.4										Early Classic	1.85									LAD												Terminal Classic	1.1										Late Classic	1.2										Early Classic 	1.4									EVENT												Spanish conquests 1521-1535 AD. 	0.479																				Caribbean - Mainland Coast	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.5										Chiriqui	1.2		"Three-colour (black, red and cream) polychrome pottery, two (black and red) and three colour (black, red and cream) negative pottery, large perfectly round balls, a very thin, well-fired ceramic called biscuit, peg-base stone statues, triangular stone projectile points, goldwork, funerary stone pillars, stone cist graves. Follows the Early Chibcha tradition, precedes the historic period (16th century)."																		Caribbean - Islands	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.5		Late Caribbean								Late Caribbean	1		"Ceramics specific to each regional subtradition are key diagnosic material attributes. Follows the Early Caribbean Tradition, precedes the historic period. "								"Early Caribbean (Saladoid, Early Ceramic, Troumassoid, Early Ostionoid)"	3		"Ninety percent of all artefacts are pottery. Saladoid series is composed of well made pottery vessels including complex shapes decorated with red, black, white on red, and polychrome painting; zoned-incised zoomorphic adornos; strap and loop handles. Small zoomorphic stone pendants and beads made from exotic materials. Follows and displaces Late Northwest South American Littoral. Develops as part of Early Amazonean tradition. Followed by Late Caribbean. "																		NW South America - Coast	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.5		Ecuadorian Highlands								Manteno	1.2		"Assemblages vary by phase and region, but classic, late phase Manteno ceramics include polished black wares featuring elegantly shaped bell-rimmed jars, bowls, and pedestal plates; some vessels take elaborate human and animal forms, and some are decorated with modeled animalfaces and human forms, as well as incised, engraved, painted resist, and burnished decorations. Also diagnostic of late Manteno culture are large burial urns; decorated ceramic spindle whorls; copper-bronze implements, ornaments, and axe-monies; gold and silver ornaments and vessels; and stone scultptures including U-shaped  stone seats. Manteno peoples constructed deep shaft tombs, earthen platforms, agricultural terraces, wells and water catchment facilities, and buildings with stone foundations. Manteno, assigned to the integration period in the widely used archaeological chronology of Ecuador, follows the Bahia culture, was contemporary with the final portion of the Central Coastal Chiefdoms tradition, and was terminated at the European contact. "								Ecuadorian Highlands	1.5		"The Late period in Carchi/Narino is marked by the appearance of a distinctive resist-decorated ware, along with a distinctive far form, the Botijuela, and a new goldworking tradition. The earliest circular house foundations in this region also date to this period. In Imbabura/Pichincha region, the Late period is marked by the beginning of mouns construction. The break between middle and late periods in the Chimborazo/Bolivar subtradition seems to be marked by the appearance of incised decoration and perhaps anthropomorphic jars. There is no such clear distinguishing feature in Canar/Azuay subtradition. however, the Late period in the Loja Regional subtradition is distinguished by the appearance of corrugated wares that seem to reflect Amazonian penetration of a region formerly occupied by highland peoples. Follows and overlaps with the Andean Regional Development tradition, precedes the historic period. Generally corresponds to the ""Integration Period"" in the standard chronology used by both Ecuadorian and international scholars. In this chronology, the Integration period followed the ""Regional Development Period"" (1500-2500 B.P.) and preceded the Inca conquest that began about 500 B.P. "								Central Coast Regional Chiefdoms	2.5		"Elaborate hollow ceramic figurines depicting high-status personages in ritual attire; large central communities with flat-topped pyramidal mounds (tolas); rectangular and square ceremonial structures; miniatures ceramic models (manquettas) of these structures. Diagnostic pottery includes shallow polypod bowls and tall pedestal bowls or cups (compoteras). Follows the Early Chibcha tradition and precedes the Mateno tradition. Falls within the Regional Developmental period in the traditional Ecuadorian periodisation scheme. It follows the Late Formative period (Chorrera culture) and precedes the so-called Integration period . However, the ending date of 1500 B.P. is variable throughout Ecuador, as several ehthic groups continued until the conquest with little or no ""integration"" into larger policies. "								Late Northwest South American Littoral	3		TOP								Late Northwest South American Littoral	5.5		"Simple stone tools made of local and imported materials. Grinding and chopping stones, edge-utilised flakes. Large shells were modified to serve as possible digging implements, bowls, or spoons. Smaller shell artefacts included beads and pendants. Pointed tools made of animal bone have also been found. In parts of Ecuador and Colombia, this period was marked by the appearance and/or continued elaboration of ceramics, with a diverse array of forms and decorative techniques, including figurines. Follows the Early Northwest South American Littoral tradition, precedes the Early Chibcha tradition. "																		NW South America - Sothern Middle America	block	150	206/187/222		off							TOP	0.5		Paya/ Late Chibcha (Columbia)								Late Chibcha (Columbia)	1.2		"Goldwork of outstanding craftsmanship, often in unique anthropomorphic and animorphic forms.Distinctive ceramics with a great deal of regional variation, including tripod drinking vessels from eastern Costa Rica, fine biscuit ware jars from western Panama, and long necked jars from Sabana de Bogat in Columbia. Large settlements with open plazas and elevated platforms for cermonies or residences. Follows the Early Chibcha tradition and precedes the historic period. "								Paya	1.5		"Polychrome ceramics, often red and black on orange; chipped T-shaped axes. Follows the Early Chibcha tradition, precedes the historic period. "								Gran Cocle	2		"A unique imagery that combines geometric and zoomorphic motifs (often anthromorphized) on pottery, goldwork, animal products, shells, stone, and resin. Fine red-slipped and smoked pottery. Stone columns sometimes with carved human and/or animal figures and cobblestone pavements, but at contiguous Sitio Conte and El Cano - probably the tradition's topranked political and ceremonial center. Extremely varied mortuary practices. Burials in subterranean graves and earthen mounds, but only simple nonperishable grave architecture. Unassuming dwellings with clay floors and thatched roofs. Stone-lined ovens in circles. Little landscape modification, but some stone-walled precincts and terraces. Cotton and bark fabrics, but no information on designs. Follows the Early Chibcha tradition and precedes the historic period. In the local sequence, period covered is generally referred to as Middle Ceramic B to Late Ceramic E. Overlaps completely with the Paya and ends about 400 BP (-1600 AC)"								Early Chibcha (Columbia)	3.5		"Ceramics with plastic decoration, greenstone ornaments, gold ornaments, flying panel metates, lime containers. Follows the Late Northwest South American Littoral tradition and precedes the Late Chibcha tradition. "								Late Northwest South American Littoral	5.5		"Simple stone tools made of local and imported materials. Grinding and chopping stones, edge-utilised flakes. Large shells were modified to serve as possible digging implements, bowls, or spoons. Smaller shell artefacts included beads and pendants. Pointed tools made of animal bone have also been found. In parts of Ecuador and Colombia, this period was marked by the appearance and/or continued elaboration of ceramics, with a diverse array of forms and decorative techniques, including figurines. Follows the Early Northwest South American Littoral tradition, precedes the Early Chibcha tradition. "								Early Northwest South American Littoral	9		"Simple stone tools made of local materials, especially cherts. Grinding and chopping stones, edge-utilised flakes. Large shells were modified to serve as possible digging implements, bowls or spoons. Smaller shell artefacts included beads and pendants. Pointed tools made of animal bone were used, possibly as projectile points. Red hematite was also employed. The latter part of the period saw the emergence of fiber and sand-tempered  pottery decorated with incision and zoomorphic adornments, in the interior hills of Caribbean Colombia. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition and precedes the Late Northwest South American Littoral tradition. "																													South America	:	South America overview	Andean	Argentina	Amazon region																	South America overview	:	Generalized S America ages																				Andean	:	Andean - Highland	Andean - Coastal	Andean - Northern	Andean - Southern	Andean - Amazon																Argentina	:	Argentina intervals	Argentina - Patagonian Coast																			Amazon region	:	Amazon - main intervals	Amazon - Brazillian Uplands	Amazon - Brazillian Lowlands																		Generalized S America ages	block	150	246/177/182	notitle								TOP	0										Spanish and Portuguese influx	0.468		Pizarro conquest in 1532 AD								Nazca through Inca kingdoms	2.2										Formative	4.1										Archaic	7										Hunting and Collecting	13																				Andean - Highland	block	150	246/177/182		off							TOP	0.468		Inca								Inca	0.8		"Megalithic architecture and fine cut-stone masonry. Rectangular structures, often with gabled roofs and trapezoidal doors and niches. Limited repertoire of highly standarized polychrome pottery vessels typically decorated with geometric design, the tall-necked jar known as the aribalo being the quitenssential Inca vessel form. Planned provincial administrative centres with standard architecture features, including a central ceremonial platform, storage facilities, a hours for ""chosen women"", and a large rectangular halls. Carved or otherwise modified natural rock outcrops. Large-scale agricultural terracing, hydraulic systems, and road networks. Miniature human and camellid forms cast in metal. Geometric design blocks. Follows the Andean Regional States tradition and precedes the historic period ushered in by the Spanish Conquest in 468 B.P."								Aymara Kingdom (Lake Titicaca) 	0.9		"Fortified settements know as pukaras, burial towers called chulapas, Sillustani and Collao pottery types. Follows the collapse of the Tiahuanaco state and precedes the expansion of the Inca empire in the 14th or 15th century. "								TOP	1.3		 Andean Regional Development								"Tiwanaku (Tiahuanaco, Lake Titicaca)"	1.6		"Stone sculptural traditions of anthropomorphic stelae and low relief carvings. Cut-stone public architechture including sunken rectangular  courts and pyramidal  or stepped platform mounds. Settlement  pattern hierarchy with large urban site, secondary centres, and farmsteads with raised-field agricultural systems in highlands. Serving and ceremonial pottery including kero drinking goblets, anthropomorphic and zoomorphic vessels, polychromes typically red-slipped with motifs in black, white, orange and blue-grey. Characteristics utilitarian plain-ware pottery. Camelid wool and cotton textiles including polychrome striped warp-faced plain weaves and figural tunics of interlocked tapestry technique, both with loop stitch embroidery. Bronze, gold and silver metallurgy, diverse lithic and lapidary industries. Follows the Andean Regional Development tradition, precedes the Aymara Kingdoms and Andean Regional States traditions. In the terminology of the Tiawanaku region, the tradition includes the terminal ""Early Intermediate Period"" and the ""Middle Horizon"" and precedes the ""Late Intermediate Period"". This partly overlaps with the Andean Regional Development."								 Andean Regional Development	2.2		"Localised but interacting states with complex ideology, symbol systems, and social forms. Highly developed ceramics, metallurgy, and weaving. Follows the end of the Upper Formative manifestation; in the northern and central highlands, after the fall of Chavin."								Highland Andean Formative	3.5		"Sedentary agriculturalist with a reliance on maize and domesticated animals, living in large villages and ceremonial centres. Ranking or stratification is present, as in pottery manufacture and metallurgy. Defined by the first appearance of ceramics, this period includes the phases of Initial Period and the Early Horizon. In the northern half of the area, the Chavin state emerges midway through this phase, and there the period ends with the collapse of the Chavin; in the southern half of the area, the period ends with the beginning of the Andean Regional Development phase. "								"Highland Andean Late Archaic (Late Preceramic, Terminal Late Archaic, Late Archaic, Transitional)"	4.5		"A variety of projectile  point styles including lanceolate, foliate, and triangular forms. In the central and south-central Andes, rare ceremonial sites consisting of rectangular/ovid structures with central hearths and sometimes underground flues. Follows the Early Highland Andean Archaic tradition, and precedes the Highland Andean Formative tradition. "								Highland Andean Early Archaic	7		"Chipped-stone industry including relatively small, leaf-shaped, diamond-shaped or shouldered projectile points and unifacial tools. Industries include bone tools, rare ground stone, aand ornaments of mineral, shell, or bone. Cave occupation sites, with some open-air camps. Pictographs in a variety of pigment colours. Follows the Late Andean Hunting-Collecting tradition and precedes the Late Highland Andean Archaic tradition."								Old South American Hunting-Collecting	15		"Various kinds of bifacial and unifacial stone tool technologies, features such as hearths and small storage pits, quarry, camp and kill sites. The first cultural tradition in Andean South America; it precedes the Late Andean Hunting-Collecting tradtion."																		Andean - Coastal	block	150	246/177/182		off							TOP	0.53		 Andean Regional States (Late Intermediate Period (LIP)) and Aymara Kingdom (Lake Titicaca) 								 Andean Regional States (Late Intermediate Period (LIP))	0.9		"Stylistically highly variable. Handmade and mold-made ceramics, bronze-copper-silver-gold metallurgy, fine cotton and camelid-wool textiles, elaborate irrigation and terracing, camelid herding, some cities and fortified settlements, burial monuments. Follows the collapse of the Middle Horizon empires of Wari and Tiahuanaco, precedes the expansion of the Late Horizon Inka empire. "								TOP	1.2		"Moche (Mochica, Early Chimu)"								"Moche (Mochica, Early Chimu)"	1.95		"Ceramics with black paste and, especially, orange or red paste with bi-or trichrome (red, black, white) painting or with decoration in relief, produced by molding, stamping or surface additions. Ornaments of gold, silver, copper, or alloys, manufactured by a variety of methods including lost wax casting. Camelid wool or textiles with polychrome decoration made on rudimentary looms. Wattle-and-daub or adobe houses with packed earthen floors. Monumental public architechture, called huacas, built out of adobe and consisting of platforms, terraces, and ramps. Polychrome murals. Follows the Andean Regional Development tradition and precedes the Wari tradition. Encompasses the last six centuries of the Early Intermediate period and the first two centuries of the Middle Horizon. "								Coastal Andean Late Formative (Early Horizon)	2.2		TOP								Coastal Andean Late Formative (Early Horizon)	3		"Pottery on the north coast varies in thickness and is often decorated with incision, stamped circle and dots, textile and netimpressions, or occasional painting. South coast pottery has incised designs associated with postfired polychrome  painting as well as simpler prefired painting. Vessel shapes on the north coast include tall-neck bottles, thick stirrup spout vessels, neckless ollas, tall-neck and short-necked jars, large jars with everted rims, and open bowls, whereas the south coast vessel shapes are dominated by double-spout-and bridge vessels and open bowls. Long, thin ground-slate projectile points are typical of the north coast. Woven cotton textiles with geometric designs occur on the north coast, whwere as elaborate embroidered  wool and cotton textiles typify the south coast. Copper and gold artefacts appear for the first time in this period. Houses are rectangular and irregular quandrangular structures with stone footings and cane and/or wooden superstructures, and most are laid out in an irregular pattern. Settlement patterns are characterised by large communities of interconnected room complexes that incorporate low platforms.  Follows the Early Coastal Andean Formative tradition, precedes the Andean Reagional Developmental tradition. "								Coastal Andean Early Formative	4.1		"Pottery is relatively thing and unevenly fired, with principal forms being neckless ollas, short-necked jars, and open bowls. Some thin-walled stirrup-spout vessels occur in sites along the north coast. Twined and woven cotton textiles are present. Sites are dominated by very large bilaterally symmetrical flat-topped  mounds associated with rectangular and circular plazas. Medium-sized stone mounds are often present and laid out in precisely aligned rows. Follows the Late Coastal Andean Archaic tradition and precedes the Late Coastal Andean Formative tradition. "								Coastal  Andean Early Archaic	7		Agricultural coastal villages define the Coastal Andean Archaic. The absence of ceramics is also a key diagnostic feature. Follows the Late Andean Hunting-Collecting tradition and precedes the Early Coastal Andean Formative tradition. 																		Andean - Northern	block	150	246/177/182		off							TOP	0.48		Chimu								Chimu	1.05		"Finely burnished black-ware ceramics including stirrup-sprout vessels with surface treatments such as panels of raised strippling or repeated waves, appliqued animal, human, and mythic figures. Moldmade adobes used to construct rectilinear compounds enclosing erchitectural features such as baffled entries, ramps and benches, and niches; interior walls decorated with sculpted reliefs depicting waves, fish, pelicans, and other marine motifs. Settlement patterns vary, but may range from large urban centers to small rural hamlets. Follows the Moche tradition and precedes the Inka tradition. "								Huari (or Wari)	1.2		"Pottery, artitecture, textiles, carved stone, carved wood, carved bone, feather work, sculpted stone statuary, and metal ornaments. Planned orthogonal architectural buildings with corbeled floor supports, niches, corridors, galleries, open courtyards, drainage canals, and open plazas, as well as specialised irregular buildings such as D-shaped ceremonial structures. Follows the Andean Regional Development tradition, precedes the Andean Regional States tradition. "								TOP	1.3		Nazca (Nasca)								Nazca (Nasca)	2.2		"Polychrome potterypainted in up to fifteen colours with complex mythical as well as naturalistic motifs; evidence of warfare and the ritual use of human trophy heads; large ground drawings (geoglyphs) etched on the surface of the desert in the form of lines, geometric forms, and naturalistic figures; settlements small to moderate in size, constructed of irregular fieldstone or adobe; cermonial centers consisting of modified natural hills forming pyramidal structures. Precedes the huari tradition and follows the Late Coastal Andean Formative tradition. Corresponds to the Early Intermediate Period in the Peruvian chronological sequence; follows the Early horizon Paracas culture and precedes the Middle Horizon Huari (Wari) culture. "								Chavin	2.8		"Monumental stone and adobe temple with plazas. Stone and adobe  sculpture, painted textiles, metalwork, and decorated pottery expressing religious ideology through a complex symbolic system. There frequently depict a paramount supernatural and secondarydeities. Ceramics are typically fired black, polished, and embellished with standardised sets of incised, stamped, textured, and molded design elements and motifs. Abundant exotic pottery, shells, and precious stones are often found in both ritual and domestic contexts. Overlaps with the Highland Andean Formative tradition and precedes the Andean Regional Development period. Corresponds to the Early Horizon, which follows the Initial Period and proceedds the Early Intermediate Period."																		Andean - Southern	block	150	246/177/182		off							TOP	0.5		South Andean Ceramic								South Andean Ceramic	2.5		"Agricultural villages with ceramics. Strongly influenced by the Incas. Follows the Highland Andean Formative, precedes the historic period. "																		Andean - Amazon	block	150	246/177/182		off							TOP	0.15		Tupi								Tupi	1.5		"For both the Guarani and the Tupinamba, a sand-tempered pottery sometimes decorated by elaborate polychrome painting in red and/or black or brown on a white slip. In the case of the Guarani, the coiled technique of vessel forming has not been often obliterated externally (corrugated), whereas the Tupinamba it has been smoothed; moreover, vessels forms are completely different in the two subtraditions. Decorated techinques include nail incisions. Lithic intruments are small, pollish stone axeheads; stone pendants; quartz T-shaped labrets; bipolar flaked chert tools and massive bifaced choppers. Wooden houses were elongated or rounded and often arranged linearly or in a circle around a plaza. c. 1500-150 B.P. Tupian languages were spoken from 5000 B.P. to the present. Carbon-14 date the archaeology Tupi ceramics (Guarani and Tupinamba) from 1800-300B.P. Tupi ethnocentric cultures were known from 450B.P. to the present. "																		Argentina intervals	block	150	246/187/182		off							TOP	0.5										Late Parana-Pampean	1.5		"The presence of ceramics is the primary diagnostic feature of this tradition. Small, triangular projectile points are also diagnostic. Follows the Early Parana-Pampean tradition and precedes the historic period. "								Early Parana-Pampean	7		Distinctive triangular stemmed projectile points. Follows the Late Andean Hunting-Collecting tradition and includes the initial colonization of some parts of the Parana-Pampean tradition. 																		Argentina - Patagonian Coast	block	150	246/187/182		off							TOP	0.05		Magellan-Fuegan								Magellan-Fuegan	6.3		"Bark or plank caones. Two types of dwellings: dome-shaped huts of branches and leaves, and conical huts of poles. Bone tools arevery abundant  but do not outnumber the lithic ones. Most diagnostics are two harpoon classes, detachable point with one or two bards and fix-to-handle multiple barbed ones. Lithic tools are very abundant, little varied and, except for the weapon points, they were poor specialised in function. This is the only native cultural tradition definable in the area, although there is an earlier record of the occasional presence of small groups of another, stil culturally undetermined, tradition."																		Amazon - main intervals	block	150	246/187/182		off							TOP	0.05		Late Amazonian								Late Amazonian	2		"Sedentary and possibly socially ranked mixed horticulturalists and intensive agriculturalists living in large villages often placed on mounds. Some cultures also have representative mounds. Subsistence ranges from possible manioc cultivation to be intensive maize cultivation late in the period. Fishing is the most important source of faunal food, but late prehistoric period people have stable isotope ratios that suggest a dominance of maize in their protein supply. People made elaborately decorated pottery and sculptures and often buried their dead in urns in large cemeteries used for long periods. The characteristic polychrome subtradition pottery bears elaborate polychrome and/or incised and modeled decoration. The forms include adorno bowls, effigies of many kinds, anthropomorphic zoomorphic  burial urns, female rattle figurines, and pendant pigment pots, stools, etc. The Incised and Punctate subtradition pottery corpus also includes adorno bowls, diverse effigies, burial bowls, female figurine rattles, but in addition has large statues of effigy vessels representing realistic human images. Follows the Early Amazonian tradition and continues into the historic period."								Early Amazonian	7		"At least partly sedentary villagers relying mainly on fishing and shellfishing supplemented with plant collection, hunting, and probably plant cultivation. By the end of the tradition. The pottery tradition begins with simple pottery bowls and ends with more varied pottery. Deposits of the Pottery Archaic subtradition was first identified in excavations in large shell midden sites along the mainstream Amazon and its estuary in the lower Amazon of the Brazil and the coastal plain of the Guianas. Most of the pottery sherds found in the earliest sites are from plain sand-tempered bowls. Only a few sherds at each site were decorated , with red paint, incision or corrugation, depending on the site. Some pottery at some of the later sites of the tradition is shell tempered, but grit or sand temper continues to be more common. About 3% of sherds are decorated with repeated geometric grooved designs. Later, Formative subtradition sites have more elaborate pottery with broadline incision, zone incised hatched, red and white paint, modeling, adorno bowls, and animal effigy vessels. Some of these Formative subtradition sites have griddles; other have decorative stamps and tabacco effigy pipes. The most common figurative images are zoomorphic, but there are rare anthropomorphic animals too. Grit-tempered is common, but sherd temper was characteristic of teh sites on Marajo island at the south of the Amazon. Bone and shell were made into tools, such as scrapers and simple figurative carvings. Some sites have crude flaked lithics, others not. Follows the Old Amazonian Collecting-Hunting tradition, precedes the Late Amazonian tradition. "								Old Amazonian Collecting-Hunting	11		"Nomadic collector hunters with a focus on tropical forest nuts and fruits, fish, shellfish, and smaller game. These people were rock artists and makers of a wide variety of flaked-stone tools. The Palaeoindian subtradition was first recongnised in surface finds of finely flaked triangular stemmed or hollow-based projectile points of hyaline quartz or chalcedony. When finally excavated, the projectile points were found with a variety of other tools, including unifacial gravers, slug-shaped scrapers (limaces), blades, and flake scrapers. Larger, coarser tools with fewer flake removals were made of quartz breccia. The Palaeoindian subtradition is similar to the earliest accepted Palaeoindian cultureof central and southern Brazil, first described at Lagoa Santa, Minas Gerais state, and of the Iaparica culture of Goias. The Archaic tradition is characterised by percussion-flaked hayaline quartz lithics lacking bifacial projectile points. Begins the known human occupation of the Amazon; precedes the Early Amazonian tradition. "																		Amazon - Brazillian Uplands	block	150	246/187/182		off							TOP	0.05		Late East Brazilian Uplands								Late East Brazilian Uplands	5		"Ceramics are present. Many sites show evidence of horticulture, in particular, manioc. Most sites have bola stones and plugs. Follows the Early Brazilian Uplands tradition, precedes the historic period. "								Early East Brazilian Uplands	11		"Most Early East Brazilian Uplands sites occur in rock shelters, although open sites exist. Projectile points are made from bone and stone. Stone points tend to have contracting stems and square or slightly hooked shoulders. Not all sites, however, have projectile points. Long and narrow stone scrapers are more common, and some sites have large, hooked stone knives. A few Early East Brazilian Upland sites have bola stones, a trait common with the prehistoric cultures in the Pampas region to the south. Polished and grooved axes are also present. Although most sites have the remainsof modern fauna, several of the sites in the states of Mina Gerais and Bahia contain bones of extinct Pleistocene megafauna as well as modern fauna. Follows the Late Palaeoindian tradition, precedes the Late East Brazilian Uplands tradition. "																		Amazon - Brazillian Lowlands	block	150	246/187/182		off	"Location: The entire length of the Brazilian coastal plain south of the mouth of the Amazonian river. Important sites: Pantano do Sul, Praia da Tapera, Sambaqui da Caiera, Sambaqui de Camboinhas, Sambaqui da carnica, Sambaqui at Forte Marechal Luz, Sambaqui da Pedra Oca, Sambaqui da Picaguera, Sambaquis de Ponta das Almas, Sambaqui do Rio Sao Joao. "						TOP	0.65		Sambaqui								Sambaqui	7		"The major diagnostic trait is the presence of shell mounds. These mounds consist consist of mollusk shell mixed with windblown and water-born deposits. Some mounds are refuse mounds, and others serve as platforms for habitation structures. Burials may occur in both types of mounds. Also diagnostic are bone and shell fishhooks and an economy based on mullusks, wild nuts and fruit. Overlaps the Early east Brasilian Uplands and the Late East Brasilian Uplands traditions in coastal areas, precedes the historic. "																																								Ice-Rafting Events in N.Atlantic (coolings)	event	70	236/204/215								EVENT												1.4 ka	1.4										2.8 ka	2.8										4.2 ka	4.2										5.9 ka	5.9										8.2 ka	8.1										9.4 ka	9.4										10.3 ka	10.3										11.1 ka	11.1										H1	16.5										H2	23.5										H3	32										H4	39.5										H5	47										H6	67										H7?	87																																										Greenland NGRIP Oxy-18 (b2k)	point	250			off	"From Seierstad et al. (2014 QuatSciRev); NGRIP1 until 9820 b2k,  NGRIP2 below"					nopoints	line		-36	-33.5								0.02	-34.91										0.04	-35.11										0.06	-34.65										0.08	-34.53										0.1	-35.29										0.12	-35.02										0.14	-35.02										0.16	-35.78										0.18	-35.16										0.2	-35.61										0.22	-35.12										0.24	-35.79										0.26	-35.82										0.28	-35.36										0.3	-36.05										0.32	-35.39										0.34	-36.14										0.36	-35.33										0.38	-35.35										0.4	-35.72										0.42	-35.03										0.44	-35.61										0.46	-35.83										0.48	-34.93										0.5	-35.07										0.52	-35.87										0.54	-35.13										0.56	-34.98										0.58	-35.04										0.6	-35.54										0.62	-34.86										0.64	-35.25										0.66	-36.43										0.68	-35.07										0.7	-35.2										0.72	-35.49										0.74	-35.66										0.76	-35.4										0.78	-35.15										0.8	-35.8										0.82	-35.34										0.84	-35.62										0.86	-35.36										0.88	-35.59										0.9	-35.14										0.92	-35.45										0.94	-35.61										0.96	-35.92										0.98	-34.96										1	-35.24										1.02	-35.02										1.04	-35										1.06	-34.98										1.08	-35.41										1.1	-35.73										1.12	-35.35										1.14	-35.75										1.16	-35.45										1.18	-35.34										1.2	-35.38										1.22	-35.27										1.24	-35.15										1.26	-35.33										1.28	-35.33										1.3	-35.27										1.32	-35.14										1.34	-34.69										1.36	-35.44										1.38	-35.26										1.4	-35.14										1.42	-35.28										1.44	-34.43										1.46	-35.78										1.48	-35.33										1.5	-35.83										1.52	-35.38										1.54	-35.36										1.56	-35.74										1.58	-34.46										1.6	-34.64										1.62	-35.27										1.64	-35.86										1.66	-35.49										1.68	-35.27										1.7	-35.8										1.72	-34.93										1.74	-35.55										1.76	-35.9										1.78	-35.44										1.8	-35.47										1.82	-35.37										1.84	-35.04										1.86	-35.39										1.88	-34.49										1.9	-35.07										1.92	-34.43										1.94	-34.71										1.96	-35.1										1.98	-35.32										2	-35.11										2.02	-34.79										2.04	-35.35										2.06	-34.95										2.08	-34.89										2.1	-35.07										2.12	-35.46										2.14	-35.18										2.16	-36.07										2.18	-35.76										2.2	-35.2										2.22	-35.26										2.24	-34.84										2.26	-34.57										2.28	-34.81										2.3	-35.11										2.32	-34.94										2.34	-35.09										2.36	-35.26										2.38	-35.08										2.4	-34.68										2.42	-34.86										2.44	-35.32										2.46	-35.88										2.48	-35.48										2.5	-35.71										2.52	-34.83										2.54	-35.24										2.56	-34.84										2.58	-35.43										2.6	-35.06										2.62	-35.41										2.64	-35.14										2.66	-35.14										2.68	-35.43										2.7	-35.32										2.72	-35.12										2.74	-35.1										2.76	-34.83										2.78	-34.91										2.8	-34.99										2.82	-34.92										2.84	-34.63										2.86	-35.49										2.88	-35.2										2.9	-34.98										2.92	-34.81										2.94	-34.38										2.96	-34.81										2.98	-34.85										3	-34.79										3.02	-35.45										3.04	-35.14										3.06	-34.94										3.08	-35.14										3.1	-34.97										3.12	-34.87										3.14	-35.04										3.16	-35.26										3.18	-34.54										3.2	-35.25										3.22	-35.28										3.24	-34.76										3.26	-35.54										3.28	-35.25										3.3	-35.24										3.32	-34.89										3.34	-34.29										3.36	-34.98										3.38	-35.42										3.4	-34.66										3.42	-34.8										3.44	-34.67										3.46	-35.19										3.48	-35.28										3.5	-34.75										3.52	-35.1										3.54	-35.42										3.56	-34.77										3.58	-34.63										3.6	-35.09										3.62	-35.18										3.64	-34.93										3.66	-34.28										3.68	-34.71										3.7	-34.68										3.72	-34.41										3.74	-34.65										3.76	-35.36										3.78	-35.27										3.8	-34.78										3.82	-35.01										3.84	-35.17										3.86	-35.36										3.88	-34.9										3.9	-35.34										3.92	-35.16										3.94	-34.85										3.96	-35.12										3.98	-34.96										4	-35.14										4.02	-34.41										4.04	-35.2										4.06	-34.74										4.08	-35.53										4.1	-35.14										4.12	-34.87										4.14	-35.2										4.16	-34.72										4.18	-34.76										4.2	-34.5										4.22	-34.78										4.24	-35.01										4.26	-35.26										4.28	-34.92										4.3	-34.63										4.32	-34.79										4.34	-34.75										4.36	-35										4.38	-35.47										4.4	-35.2										4.42	-34.76										4.44	-34.06										4.46	-34.8										4.48	-35.15										4.5	-34.83										4.52	-35.27										4.54	-34.83										4.56	-34.21										4.58	-34.57										4.6	-34.51										4.62	-35.05										4.64	-34.69										4.66	-35.21										4.68	-35.02										4.7	-34.71										4.72	-34.79										4.74	-35.09										4.76	-34.54										4.78	-34.82										4.8	-34.66										4.82	-34.93										4.84	-34.42										4.86	-34.89										4.88	-34.79										4.9	-34.65										4.92	-34.55										4.94	-34.57										4.96	-34.08										4.98	-34.92										5	-34.79										5.02	-34.53										5.04	-34.8										5.06	-34.63										5.08	-34.84										5.1	-34.64										5.12	-35.11										5.14	-34.73										5.16	-35.05										5.18	-33.85										5.2	-34.63										5.22	-34.9										5.24	-34.74										5.26	-34.56										5.28	-35.27										5.3	-35.03										5.32	-34.77										5.34	-35.39										5.36	-34.96										5.38	-34.78										5.4	-35.1										5.42	-34.35										5.44	-34.81										5.46	-34.91										5.48	-34.47										5.5	-34.53										5.52	-34.7										5.54	-34.36										5.56	-34.22										5.58	-35.06										5.6	-34.78										5.62	-35.19										5.64	-33.88										5.66	-35.2										5.68	-35.18										5.7	-34.51										5.72	-35.25										5.74	-34.69										5.76	-34.71										5.78	-34.55										5.8	-34.5										5.82	-34.71										5.84	-35.02										5.86	-34.71										5.88	-33.95										5.9	-34.2										5.92	-34.61										5.94	-34.91										5.96	-34.73										5.98	-34.85										6	-35.03										6.02	-34.77										6.04	-34.78										6.06	-35.49										6.08	-34.27										6.1	-35.17										6.12	-34.71										6.14	-34.39										6.16	-34.42										6.18	-34.89										6.2	-34.89										6.22	-34.58										6.24	-34.6										6.26	-35.13										6.28	-34.38										6.3	-35.2										6.32	-34.55										6.34	-34.6										6.36	-34.86										6.38	-34.99										6.4	-34.23										6.42	-34.62										6.44	-34.07										6.46	-34.97										6.48	-34.32										6.5	-34.5										6.52	-34.53										6.54	-35.01										6.56	-34.97										6.58	-34.98										6.6	-34.45										6.62	-34.37										6.64	-34.61										6.66	-34.57										6.68	-34.74										6.7	-34.37										6.72	-34.49										6.74	-34.52										6.76	-34.58										6.78	-35.12										6.8	-34.69										6.82	-34.32										6.84	-34.36										6.86	-34.72										6.88	-34.56										6.9	-34.97										6.92	-34.32										6.94	-34.26										6.96	-35.11										6.98	-34.73										7	-34.47										7.02	-34.82										7.04	-34.9										7.06	-34.77										7.08	-34.4										7.1	-34.95										7.12	-34.97										7.14	-34.36										7.16	-35.28										7.18	-34.74										7.2	-34.68										7.22	-34.93										7.24	-34.87										7.26	-34.12										7.28	-34.84										7.3	-34.99										7.32	-34.73										7.34	-34.64										7.36	-34.74										7.38	-34.31										7.4	-34.55										7.42	-34.62										7.44	-34.5										7.46	-34.44										7.48	-33.88										7.5	-34.77										7.52	-34.78										7.54	-35.04										7.56	-34.34										7.58	-34.52										7.6	-34.08										7.62	-34.01										7.64	-34.88										7.66	-33.9										7.68	-34.01										7.7	-34.65										7.72	-34.26										7.74	-34.09										7.76	-34.75										7.78	-34.35										7.8	-34.13										7.82	-33.76										7.84	-34.35										7.86	-34.4										7.88	-34.62										7.9	-34.98										7.92	-34.51										7.94	-34.78										7.96	-34.83										7.98	-33.6										8	-34.04										8.02	-34.4										8.04	-34.43										8.06	-35.05										8.08	-34.51										8.1	-34.5										8.12	-33.96										8.14	-35.44										8.16	-35.68										8.18	-35.54										8.2	-36.06										8.22	-35.88										8.24	-36.03										8.26	-35.21										8.28	-35.68										8.3	-34.5										8.32	-34.7										8.34	-34.87										8.36	-34.95										8.38	-34.41										8.4	-35.36										8.42	-34.79										8.44	-34.46										8.46	-35.07										8.48	-34.7										8.5	-34.43										8.52	-34.83										8.54	-34.99										8.56	-34.59										8.58	-34.35										8.6	-34.83										8.62	-34.18										8.64	-35.02										8.66	-35.46										8.68	-35.21										8.7	-34.01										8.72	-34.92										8.74	-34.49										8.76	-35.34										8.78	-34.21										8.8	-35.57										8.82	-35.22										8.84	-34.08										8.86	-35.15										8.88	-34.57										8.9	-34.17										8.92	-34.3										8.94	-34.71										8.96	-34.57										8.98	-34.47										9	-34.68										9.02	-35.57										9.04	-35.18										9.06	-34.92										9.08	-34.73										9.1	-34.61										9.12	-34.98										9.14	-34.47										9.16	-34.34										9.18	-34.7										9.2	-34.83										9.22	-34.92										9.24	-35.62										9.26	-35.66										9.28	-36.05										9.3	-35.19										9.32	-35.04										9.34	-34.91										9.36	-34.56										9.38	-34.87										9.4	-34.8										9.42	-34.83										9.44	-35.12										9.46	-35.12										9.48	-34.92										9.5	-34.66										9.52	-35.01										9.54	-34.56										9.56	-34.98										9.58	-35.13										9.6	-34.95										9.62	-34.77										9.64	-34.96										9.66	-34.85										9.68	-34.84										9.7	-34.62										9.72	-34.68										9.74	-34.87										9.76	-34.66										9.78	-34.49										9.8	-35.12										9.82	-35.37										9.84	-35.22										9.86	-34.54										9.88	-35.06										9.9	-35.26										9.92	-34.85										9.94	-35.46										9.96	-34.65										9.98	-35.1										10	-34.94										10.02	-35.11										10.04	-35.79										10.06	-35.21										10.08	-35.32										10.1	-35.29										10.12	-35.45										10.14	-34.99										10.16	-35.02										10.18	-34.89										10.2	-35.93										10.22	-35.54										10.24	-36.33										10.26	-36.39										10.28	-36.01										10.3	-36.01										10.32	-35.2										10.34	-36.12										10.36	-36.19										10.38	-36.36										10.4	-35.96										10.42	-36.12										10.44	-36.04										10.46	-35.53										10.48	-36.34										10.5	-35.47										10.52	-35.73										10.54	-35.86										10.56	-36										10.58	-35.88										10.6	-36.11										10.62	-36.13										10.64	-36.16										10.66	-35.49										10.68	-35.77										10.7	-36.05										10.72	-36.45										10.74	-35.88										10.76	-36.21										10.78	-36.84										10.8	-35.83										10.82	-36.59										10.84	-36.09										10.86	-37.23										10.88	-37.6										10.9	-37.25										10.92	-37.15										10.94	-36.99										10.96	-38.02										10.98	-36.53										11	-37.05										11.02	-36.44										11.04	-36.65										11.06	-36.89										11.08	-37.1										11.1	-36.71										11.12	-36.43										11.14	-37.14										11.16	-36.62										11.18	-37.24										11.2	-37.39										11.22	-37.6										11.24	-36.58										11.26	-36.15										11.28	-36.59										11.3	-37.54										11.32	-36.67										11.34	-36.91										11.36	-37.45										11.38	-37.63										11.4	-37.12										11.42	-38.47										11.44	-38.25										11.46	-38.72										11.48	-37.42										11.5	-37.84										11.52	-36.9										11.54	-36.59										11.56	-36.88										11.58	-36.78										11.6	-36.41										11.62	-36.57										11.64	-36.69										11.66	-38.5										11.68	-39.03										11.7	-39.6										11.72	-39.71										11.74	-40.86										11.76	-40.55										11.78	-39.86										11.8	-40.46										11.82	-40.96										11.84	-39.17										11.86	-38.93										11.88	-41.52										11.9	-39.73										11.92	-41.93										11.94	-40.33										11.96	-41.54										11.98	-40.53										12	-39.6										12.02	-40.19										12.04	-39.31										12.06	-40.77										12.08	-40.73										12.1	-41.89										12.12	-40.6										12.14	-41.75										12.16	-42.09										12.18	-38.91										12.2	-41.4										12.22	-40.92										12.24	-39.85										12.26	-40.76										12.28	-40.98										12.3	-40.44										12.32	-40.95										12.34	-41.72										12.36	-41.19										12.38	-40.72										12.4	-41.2										12.42	-41.02										12.44	-41.42										12.46	-39.99										12.48	-41.92										12.5	-40.62										12.52	-39.09										12.54	-40.98										12.56	-40.54										12.58	-41.45										12.6	-42.71										12.62	-40.59										12.64	-41.81										12.66	-40.93										12.68	-42.26										12.7	-41.82										12.72	-41.95										12.74	-41.04										12.76	-39.86										12.78	-40.17										12.8	-40.36										12.82	-39.88										12.84	-38.98										12.86	-39.81										12.88	-40.11										12.9	-39.42										12.92	-37.77										12.94	-38.26										12.96	-39.12										12.98	-38.96										13	-39.87										13.02	-39.56										13.04	-39.49										13.06	-40.52										13.08	-39.77										13.1	-40.58										13.12	-40.15										13.14	-41.52										13.16	-40.08										13.18	-40.53										13.2	-40.1										13.22	-40.58										13.24	-39.46										13.26	-39.3										13.28	-38.97										13.3	-39.02										13.32	-39.34										13.34	-39.08										13.36	-38.55										13.38	-38.36										13.4	-38.75										13.42	-38.14										13.44	-38.57										13.46	-38.8										13.48	-38.33										13.5	-37.74										13.52	-38.08										13.54	-38.29										13.56	-38.99										13.58	-39.36										13.6	-39.63										13.62	-40.04										13.64	-39.2										13.66	-39.09										13.68	-38.67										13.7	-38.93										13.72	-37.66										13.74	-38.45										13.76	-39.41										13.78	-38.81										13.8	-37.85										13.82	-39.07										13.84	-37.96										13.86	-38										13.88	-38.44										13.9	-38.22										13.92	-38.61										13.94	-38.01										13.96	-39.98										13.98	-39.04										14	-39.73										14.02	-40.21										14.04	-39.9										14.06	-40.95										14.08	-38.05										14.1	-38.34										14.12	-38.01										14.14	-38.68										14.16	-38.03										14.18	-37.59										14.2	-37.46										14.22	-38.43										14.24	-37.76										14.26	-37.19										14.28	-37.14										14.3	-37.05										14.32	-37.54										14.34	-36.81										14.36	-37.5										14.38	-36.07										14.4	-37.17										14.42	-37.29										14.44	-37.04										14.46	-36.86										14.48	-36.27										14.5	-36.11										14.52	-36.13										14.54	-36.14										14.56	-36.97										14.58	-35.82										14.6	-36.74										14.62	-37.48										14.64	-37.52										14.66	-37.97										14.68	-40.65										14.7	-41.97										14.72	-42.48										14.74	-40.82										14.76	-41.04										14.78	-39.91										14.8	-40.69										14.82	-42.43										14.84	-40.79										14.86	-41.16										14.88	-40.15										14.9	-41.46										14.92	-41.77										14.94	-41.67										14.96	-40.88										14.98	-42.62										15	-42.38										15.02	-41.51										15.04	-43.17										15.06	-39.96										15.08	-43.51										15.1	-42.74										15.12	-40.05										15.14	-42.33										15.16	-42.99										15.18	-42.07										15.2	-40.56										15.22	-43.55										15.24	-40.62										15.26	-44.9										15.28	-41.98										15.3	-41.3										15.32	-42.09										15.34	-40.76										15.36	-40.69										15.38	-39.95										15.4	-43.31										15.42	-42.4										15.44	-42.88										15.46	-41.6										15.48	-41.97										15.5	-43.56										15.52	-41.86										15.54	-43.24										15.56	-44.54										15.58	-42.33										15.6	-42.18										15.62	-42.11										15.64	-42.2										15.66	-40.41										15.68	-43.53										15.7	-43.05										15.72	-44.62										15.74	-42.8										15.76	-43.97										15.78	-43.88										15.8	-40.19										15.82	-41.7										15.84	-41.16										15.86	-40.81										15.88	-43.18										15.9	-42.95										15.92	-41.55										15.94	-40.54										15.96	-41.6										15.98	-41.97										16	-42.27										16.02	-41.41										16.04	-41.3										16.06	-42.99										16.08	-44.96										16.1	-43.25										16.12	-40.32										16.14	-43.59										16.16	-41.85										16.18	-41.71										16.2	-44.23										16.22	-39.89										16.24	-42.39										16.26	-41.99										16.28	-40.77										16.3	-42.07										16.32	-42.3										16.34	-42.52										16.36	-39.76										16.38	-42.77										16.4	-41.65										16.42	-40.73										16.44	-42.6										16.46	-41.23										16.48	-41.19										16.5	-38.3										16.52	-40.37										16.54	-41.69										16.56	-41.5										16.58	-40.6										16.6	-42.78										16.62	-42.79										16.64	-40.88										16.66	-41.56										16.68	-40.65										16.7	-42.7										16.72	-39.38										16.74	-40.73										16.76	-41.77										16.78	-40.93										16.8	-39.27										16.82	-40.63										16.84	-39.46										16.86	-40.34										16.88	-40.3										16.9	-42.12										16.92	-41.22										16.94	-42.42										16.96	-40.7										16.98	-42.11										17	-40.4										17.02	-42.28										17.04	-39.99										17.06	-39.76										17.08	-38.99										17.1	-42.38										17.12	-39.84										17.14	-40.22										17.16	-40.5										17.18	-40.55										17.2	-40.18										17.22	-41.24										17.24	-42.24										17.26	-39.82										17.28	-39.79										17.3	-41.55										17.32	-40.57										17.34	-40.66										17.36	-39.93										17.38	-41.25										17.4	-42.96										17.42	-42.37										17.44	-41.53										17.46	-40.75										17.48	-40.74										17.5	-41.43										17.52	-41.23										17.54	-38.88										17.56	-40.45										17.58	-41.87										17.6	-39.58										17.62	-39.7										17.64	-40.89										17.66	-40.05										17.68	-40.7										17.7	-42.52										17.72	-41.38										17.74	-41.31										17.76	-41.04										17.78	-40.89										17.8	-38.95										17.82	-41.46										17.84	-42.38										17.86	-43.39										17.88	-41.12										17.9	-40.93										17.92	-42.51										17.94	-41.74										17.96	-43.52										17.98	-42.27										18	-42.68										18.02	-41.85										18.04	-40.51										18.06	-42.83										18.08	-42.84										18.1	-42.81										18.12	-42.97										18.14	-40.59										18.16	-40.68										18.18	-40.98										18.2	-42.29										18.22	-41.83										18.24	-41.63										18.26	-44.37										18.28	-42.14										18.3	-40.73										18.32	-43.79										18.34	-42.43										18.36	-43.01										18.38	-42.34										18.4	-41.91										18.42	-42.1										18.44	-42.26										18.46	-42.84										18.48	-40.04										18.5	-42.21										18.52	-41.73										18.54	-39.91										18.56	-40.94										18.58	-42.87										18.6	-41.4										18.62	-40.38										18.64	-40.96										18.66	-40.11										18.68	-41.72										18.7	-41.08										18.72	-41.03										18.74	-42.67										18.76	-42.23										18.78	-41.44										18.8	-41.26										18.82	-40.87										18.84	-41.97										18.86	-40.38										18.88	-40.27										18.9	-42.35										18.92	-42.09										18.94	-40.86										18.96	-42.1										18.98	-41.3										19	-42.16										19.02	-40.06										19.04	-42.6										19.06	-41.82										19.08	-42.04										19.1	-41.48										19.12	-42.49										19.14	-42.76										19.16	-41.37										19.18	-43.71										19.2	-42.55										19.22	-40.5										19.24	-43.76										19.26	-41.24										19.28	-42.71										19.3	-40.43										19.32	-41.26										19.34	-41.7										19.36	-41.73										19.38	-42.88										19.4	-43.08										19.42	-42.34										19.44	-40.83										19.46	-41.37										19.48	-42.16										19.5	-41.37										19.52	-42.64										19.54	-40.95										19.56	-42.53										19.58	-40.46										19.6	-40.85										19.62	-40.88										19.64	-41.82										19.66	-39.93										19.68	-41.51										19.7	-42.02										19.72	-41.47										19.74	-41.37										19.76	-41.63										19.78	-42.81										19.8	-43.04										19.82	-41.38										19.84	-40.2										19.86	-40.71										19.88	-41.41										19.9	-40.66										19.92	-41.6										19.94	-42.6										19.96	-42.16										19.98	-42.64										20	-42.01										20.02	-41.64										20.04	-42.77										20.06	-42.71										20.08	-41.33										20.1	-42.67										20.12	-41.99										20.14	-42.62										20.16	-42.18										20.18	-42.79										20.2	-40.35										20.22	-41.41										20.24	-42.48										20.26	-42.52										20.28	-41.9										20.3	-42.4										20.32	-43.15										20.34	-41.89										20.36	-43.09										20.38	-44.55										20.4	-42.45										20.42	-43.2										20.44	-43.51										20.46	-42.01										20.48	-41.93										20.5	-43.2										20.52	-43.36										20.54	-44.96										20.56	-42.54										20.58	-42.01										20.6	-41.92										20.62	-42.42										20.64	-40.62										20.66	-40.06										20.68	-43.6										20.7	-42.11										20.72	-39.96										20.74	-42.73										20.76	-42.4										20.78	-42.98										20.8	-40.69										20.82	-43.37										20.84	-42.53										20.86	-42.1										20.88	-43.3										20.9	-42.24										20.92	-43.94										20.94	-42.94										20.96	-43.11										20.98	-44.82										21	-43.49										21.02	-42.53										21.04	-42.27										21.06	-43.66										21.08	-43.27										21.1	-42.69										21.12	-41.84										21.14	-42.07										21.16	-41.91										21.18	-43.89										21.2	-42.88										21.22	-43.89										21.24	-42.6										21.26	-42.67										21.28	-41.03										21.3	-41.95										21.32	-42.43										21.34	-43.84										21.36	-42.06										21.38	-42.53										21.4	-43.75										21.42	-41.22										21.44	-42.39										21.46	-43.02										21.48	-44.59										21.5	-41.84										21.52	-42.03										21.54	-42.88										21.56	-42.08										21.58	-41.04										21.6	-42.84										21.62	-41.93										21.64	-43.38										21.66	-42.04										21.68	-41.57										21.7	-44.16										21.72	-43.92										21.74	-42.48										21.76	-43.7										21.78	-43.52										21.8	-43.11										21.82	-42.75										21.84	-43.6										21.86	-43.13										21.88	-41.33										21.9	-41.92										21.92	-42.26										21.94	-42.44										21.96	-42.68										21.98	-42.61										22	-42.54										22.02	-41.86										22.04	-40.54										22.06	-43.26										22.08	-41.02										22.1	-43.26										22.12	-42.05										22.14	-40.97										22.16	-42.19										22.18	-41.52										22.2	-41.53										22.22	-41.17										22.24	-41.42										22.26	-42.33										22.28	-42.38										22.3	-43.06										22.32	-42.69										22.34	-41.02										22.36	-43.71										22.38	-42.42										22.4	-43.49										22.42	-42.29										22.44	-42.53										22.46	-41.86										22.48	-42.02										22.5	-43.96										22.52	-42.99										22.54	-42.83										22.56	-42.07										22.58	-42.32										22.6	-41.67										22.62	-42.78										22.64	-42.93										22.66	-43.01										22.68	-43.31										22.7	-42.74										22.72	-40.55										22.74	-40.84										22.76	-40.19										22.78	-42.56										22.8	-41.28										22.82	-42.2										22.84	-41.83										22.86	-43.67										22.88	-42.34										22.9	-41.06										22.92	-42.01										22.94	-40.34										22.96	-41.33										22.98	-41.81										23	-42.79										23.02	-42.05										23.04	-41.94										23.06	-42.19										23.08	-43.6										23.1	-43.03										23.12	-42.07										23.14	-41.83										23.16	-42.81										23.18	-41.45										23.2	-41.18										23.22	-41.92										23.24	-41.21										23.26	-40.32										23.28	-39.12										23.3	-40.34										23.32	-40.04										23.34	-41.22										23.36	-42.47										23.38	-42.81										23.4	-44.36										23.42	-42.78										23.44	-42.4										23.46	-41.89										23.48	-42.04										23.5	-44.65										23.52	-44.09										23.54	-44.64										23.56	-44.25										23.58	-41.78										23.6	-44.73										23.62	-44.65										23.64	-42.84										23.66	-43.09										23.68	-44.57										23.7	-45.3										23.72	-43.42										23.74	-41.53										23.76	-44.11										23.78	-43.96										23.8	-43.87										23.82	-44.11										23.84	-44.13										23.86	-43.67										23.88	-43.1										23.9	-43.53										23.92	-42.94										23.94	-44.46										23.96	-43.85										23.98	-40.94										24	-42.66										24.02	-42.51										24.04	-44.05										24.06	-44.08										24.08	-44.24										24.1	-42.93										24.12	-44.3										24.14	-43.07										24.16	-44.16										24.18	-42.3										24.2	-44.34										24.22	-44.51										24.24	-44.34										24.26	-43.58										24.28	-43.91										24.3	-41.79										24.32	-43.6										24.34	-43.14										24.36	-44.07										24.38	-43.9										24.4	-44.28										24.42	-42.27										24.44	-42.04										24.46	-44.64										24.48	-43										24.5	-42.92										24.52	-43.7										24.54	-43.76										24.56	-42.73										24.58	-42.03										24.6	-43.28										24.62	-42.79										24.64	-45.8										24.66	-43.65										24.68	-44.8										24.7	-42.5										24.72	-42.73										24.74	-43.04										24.76	-44.32										24.78	-43.24										24.8	-45.26										24.82	-44.3										24.84	-43.68										24.86	-44.13										24.88	-44.93										24.9	-44.74										24.92	-43.4										24.94	-41.88										24.96	-43.22										24.98	-42.68										25	-42.41										25.02	-43.53										25.04	-42.74										25.06	-43.65										25.08	-44.33										25.1	-44.11										25.12	-44.38										25.14	-43.04										25.16	-42.76										25.18	-43.1										25.2	-43.41										25.22	-42.34										25.24	-44.12										25.26	-43.08										25.28	-43.9										25.3	-43.12										25.32	-44.02										25.34	-43.42										25.36	-42.19										25.38	-43.48										25.4	-43.68										25.42	-45.1										25.44	-44.38										25.46	-45.3										25.48	-44.09										25.5	-42.36										25.52	-41.35										25.54	-42.66										25.56	-44.98										25.58	-43.59										25.6	-43.19										25.62	-43										25.64	-44.92										25.66	-44.5										25.68	-46.12										25.7	-43.73										25.72	-43.9										25.74	-45.21										25.76	-43.34										25.78	-43.44										25.8	-44.17										25.82	-43.92										25.84	-45.14										25.86	-44.36										25.88	-44.57										25.9	-44.52										25.92	-42.57										25.94	-43.2										25.96	-44.37										25.98	-42.56										26	-44.15										26.02	-45.66										26.04	-43.4										26.06	-42.39										26.08	-43.76										26.1	-41.94										26.12	-44.1										26.14	-42.57										26.16	-42.44										26.18	-41.67										26.2	-43.09										26.22	-42.25										26.24	-44.11										26.26	-43.25										26.28	-42.89										26.3	-43.2										26.32	-42.2										26.34	-42.78										26.36	-42.85										26.38	-41.77										26.4	-42.73										26.42	-42.86										26.44	-43.39										26.46	-43.25										26.48	-42.72										26.5	-44.74										26.52	-44.45										26.54	-46.5										26.56	-45.56										26.58	-43.3										26.6	-43.21										26.62	-44.21										26.64	-43.05										26.66	-43.1										26.68	-43.61										26.7	-43.11										26.72	-43.5										26.74	-44.52										26.76	-43.8										26.78	-44.37										26.8	-44.73										26.82	-42.88										26.84	-42.8										26.86	-44.66										26.88	-43.47										26.9	-43.15										26.92	-44.22										26.94	-43.1										26.96	-41.78										26.98	-43.71										27	-43.48										27.02	-43.97										27.04	-44.57										27.06	-43.98										27.08	-42.83										27.1	-42.44										27.12	-41.3										27.14	-44.38										27.16	-41.79										27.18	-43.28										27.2	-43.38										27.22	-43.18										27.24	-43.21										27.26	-43.05										27.28	-43.45										27.3	-43.11										27.32	-44.59										27.34	-43.25										27.36	-44.38										27.38	-43.68										27.4	-44.85										27.42	-44.91										27.44	-43.94										27.46	-44.48										27.48	-42.94										27.5	-42.51										27.52	-43.02										27.54	-41.7										27.56	-41.07										27.58	-40.94										27.6	-40.98										27.62	-39.39										27.64	-39.42										27.66	-40.29										27.68	-40.41										27.7	-38.85										27.72	-38.22										27.74	-38.37										27.76	-39.45										27.78	-43.78										27.8	-43.25										27.82	-44.26										27.84	-44.15										27.86	-41.96										27.88	-44.89										27.9	-44.57										27.92	-43.21										27.94	-43.7										27.96	-43.84										27.98	-44.04										28	-45										28.02	-44.93										28.04	-44.03										28.06	-44.76										28.08	-44.96										28.1	-43.75										28.12	-43.95										28.14	-43.11										28.16	-46.31										28.18	-43.66										28.2	-43.62										28.22	-44.79										28.24	-44.6										28.26	-44.88										28.28	-43.68										28.3	-42.03										28.32	-45.59										28.34	-44.61										28.36	-42.72										28.38	-44.88										28.4	-42.91										28.42	-43.39										28.44	-44.07										28.46	-44.38										28.48	-45.04										28.5	-43.32										28.52	-42.39										28.54	-43.94										28.56	-43.12										28.58	-42.97										28.6	-40.9										28.62	-40.74										28.64	-40.53										28.66	-40.22										28.68	-40.16										28.7	-41.11										28.72	-40.13										28.74	-40.79										28.76	-40.48										28.78	-38.61										28.8	-39.1										28.82	-39.6										28.84	-40.05										28.86	-40.01										28.88	-42.08										28.9	-43.87										28.92	-43.58										28.94	-43.09										28.96	-43.32										28.98	-45.33										29	-44.61										29.02	-43.98										29.04	-43.39										29.06	-43.78										29.08	-45.14										29.1	-43.98										29.12	-44.81										29.14	-42.94										29.16	-43.79										29.18	-45.29										29.2	-43.8										29.22	-42.9										29.24	-45.85										29.26	-44.03										29.28	-43.68										29.3	-44.5										29.32	-42.81										29.34	-44.93										29.36	-43.82										29.38	-43.21										29.4	-43.34										29.42	-43.94										29.44	-45.35										29.46	-44.65										29.48	-43.91										29.5	-46.39										29.52	-44.44										29.54	-44.04										29.56	-44.63										29.58	-45.87										29.6	-46.16										29.62	-44.51										29.64	-42.96										29.66	-44.89										29.68	-46.45										29.7	-44.22										29.72	-46.14										29.74	-44.55										29.76	-44.43										29.78	-43.55										29.8	-44.04										29.82	-45.21										29.84	-44.52										29.86	-43.73										29.88	-44.72										29.9	-44.45										29.92	-43.72										29.94	-44.62										29.96	-44.09										29.98	-43										30	-43.66										30.02	-45.51										30.04	-45.7										30.06	-43.86										30.08	-44.95										30.1	-46.24										30.12	-44.2										30.14	-45.05										30.16	-44.58										30.18	-43.05										30.2	-45.43										30.22	-44.56										30.24	-44.62										30.26	-45.28										30.28	-44.75										30.3	-44.93										30.32	-43.43										30.34	-44.32										30.36	-42.25										30.38	-43.93										30.4	-44.75										30.42	-44.93										30.44	-45.23										30.46	-44.74										30.48	-43.98										30.5	-43.49										30.52	-43.46										30.54	-44.24										30.56	-42.68										30.58	-44.23										30.6	-43.3										30.62	-43.8										30.64	-41.6										30.66	-42.42										30.68	-43.38										30.7	-42.22										30.72	-42.71										30.74	-42.04										30.76	-42.01										30.78	-44.02										30.8	-45.06										30.82	-42.83										30.84	-43.9										30.86	-42.45										30.88	-43.22										30.9	-43.72										30.92	-44.76										30.94	-45.4										30.96	-43.45										30.98	-44.38										31	-42.98										31.02	-44.92										31.04	-41.76										31.06	-44.26										31.08	-44.19										31.1	-44.13										31.12	-43.05										31.14	-43.6										31.16	-42.7										31.18	-45.17										31.2	-43.69										31.22	-44.26										31.24	-44.19										31.26	-43.68										31.28	-43.97										31.3	-42.79										31.32	-43.63										31.34	-43.68										31.36	-44.35										31.38	-45.21										31.4	-43.56										31.42	-43.08										31.44	-44.57										31.46	-41.63										31.48	-43.3										31.5	-45.41										31.52	-43.86										31.54	-43.38										31.56	-44.75										31.58	-43.32										31.6	-44										31.62	-44.18										31.64	-43.7										31.66	-44.29										31.68	-43.62										31.7	-43.22										31.72	-42.69										31.74	-43.12										31.76	-45.02										31.78	-43.24										31.8	-43.4										31.82	-43.52										31.84	-45.22										31.86	-42.81										31.88	-44.89										31.9	-42.74										31.92	-44.23										31.94	-43.49										31.96	-44.14										31.98	-42.57										32	-44.45										32.02	-43.86										32.04	-41.4										32.06	-41.73										32.08	-41.22										32.1	-42.79										32.12	-40.47										32.14	-41.05										32.16	-40.69										32.18	-40.85										32.2	-40.6										32.22	-39.86										32.24	-40.33										32.26	-40.71										32.28	-40.51										32.3	-40.7										32.32	-40.43										32.34	-40.42										32.36	-39.85										32.38	-39.05										32.4	-40.38										32.42	-39.63										32.44	-38.8										32.46	-38.89										32.48	-40.14										32.5	-42.38										32.52	-43.83										32.54	-43.5										32.56	-44.15										32.58	-43.76										32.6	-43.7										32.62	-43.34										32.64	-44.79										32.66	-43.27										32.68	-45.8										32.7	-44.58										32.72	-44.58										32.74	-43.08										32.76	-43.44										32.78	-45.03										32.8	-45.25										32.82	-44.83										32.84	-44.82										32.86	-45.77										32.88	-44.26										32.9	-44.07										32.92	-43.84										32.94	-42.09										32.96	-42.75										32.98	-44.29										33	-43.81										33.02	-43.81										33.04	-42.68										33.06	-43.89										33.08	-44.29										33.1	-44.16										33.12	-44.23										33.14	-43.28										33.16	-42.9										33.18	-42.66										33.2	-43.15										33.22	-44.73										33.24	-42.98										33.26	-43.44										33.28	-43.67										33.3	-45.86										33.32	-43.35										33.34	-43.35										33.36	-41.89										33.38	-41.15										33.4	-41.56										33.42	-40.97										33.44	-39.75										33.46	-40.07										33.48	-39.61										33.5	-40.43										33.52	-40.32										33.54	-38.91										33.56	-39.98										33.58	-39.96										33.6	-39.69										33.62	-39.93										33.64	-40.06										33.66	-38.58										33.68	-39.06										33.7	-39.84										33.72	-40.54										33.74	-41.82										33.76	-41.97										33.78	-42.06										33.8	-42.42										33.82	-42.38										33.84	-42.17										33.86	-44.09										33.88	-41.37										33.9	-43.38										33.92	-42.99										33.94	-42.8										33.96	-44.89										33.98	-42.84										34	-43.38										34.02	-42.27										34.04	-42.7										34.06	-43.04										34.08	-42.19										34.1	-43.32										34.12	-43.1										34.14	-42.14										34.16	-42.35										34.18	-43.36										34.2	-43.14										34.22	-41.84										34.24	-42.7										34.26	-42.3										34.28	-43.46										34.3	-44.06										34.32	-43.35										34.34	-42.36										34.36	-42.41										34.38	-44.39										34.4	-42.64										34.42	-43.17										34.44	-42.32										34.46	-42.01										34.48	-43.21										34.5	-42.71										34.52	-43.39										34.54	-43.94										34.56	-42.61										34.58	-43.08										34.6	-43.92										34.62	-43.51										34.64	-41.77										34.66	-41.32										34.68	-42.23										34.7	-43.1										34.72	-44.34										34.74	-40.91										34.76	-40.2										34.78	-39.36										34.8	-40.4										34.82	-40.99										34.84	-40.22										34.86	-40.35										34.88	-41.17										34.9	-40.44										34.92	-41.77										34.94	-40.08										34.96	-41.3										34.98	-41.05										35	-41.16										35.02	-40.04										35.04	-39.71										35.06	-39.07										35.08	-39.53										35.1	-40.02										35.12	-40.36										35.14	-39.75										35.16	-39.31										35.18	-40.11										35.2	-40.45										35.22	-38.75										35.24	-39.64										35.26	-39.31										35.28	-39.82										35.3	-39.21										35.32	-39.61										35.34	-38.49										35.36	-38.8										35.38	-39.46										35.4	-38.81										35.42	-38.25										35.44	-39.18										35.46	-39.46										35.48	-40.97										35.5	-42.74										35.52	-42.94										35.54	-44.65										35.56	-40.86										35.58	-43.17										35.6	-42.78										35.62	-42.89										35.64	-41.51										35.66	-42.96										35.68	-42.91										35.7	-41.75										35.72	-41.56										35.74	-41.31										35.76	-44										35.78	-43.1										35.8	-43.14										35.82	-44.04										35.84	-44.96										35.86	-44.37										35.88	-44.75										35.9	-43.88										35.92	-44.06										35.94	-41.75										35.96	-43.07										35.98	-42.42										36	-43.36										36.02	-43.33										36.04	-43.62										36.06	-43.21										36.08	-43.1										36.1	-43.11										36.12	-42.54										36.14	-43.06										36.16	-42.4										36.18	-40.66										36.2	-43.77										36.22	-42.71										36.24	-43.12										36.26	-43.16										36.28	-44.58										36.3	-42.32										36.32	-43.36										36.34	-41.14										36.36	-41.89										36.38	-42.5										36.4	-43.56										36.42	-42.04										36.44	-43.74										36.46	-41.81										36.48	-41.91										36.5	-41.39										36.52	-43.41										36.54	-42.99										36.56	-43.05										36.58	-42.38										36.6	-41.52										36.62	-41.91										36.64	-39.88										36.66	-40.2										36.68	-41.81										36.7	-41.09										36.72	-40.74										36.74	-41.34										36.76	-41.33										36.78	-41.23										36.8	-41.38										36.82	-39.92										36.84	-41.15										36.86	-41.21										36.88	-41.21										36.9	-41.5										36.92	-41.47										36.94	-42.17										36.96	-41.18										36.98	-41.03										37	-40.84										37.02	-41.2										37.04	-41.47										37.06	-40.7										37.08	-40.8										37.1	-41.31										37.12	-40.04										37.14	-40.53										37.16	-40.25										37.18	-39.92										37.2	-39.48										37.22	-39.69										37.24	-39.35										37.26	-40.4										37.28	-39.93										37.3	-39.41										37.32	-38.89										37.34	-39.43										37.36	-40.83										37.38	-40.19										37.4	-40.76										37.42	-39.05										37.44	-39.15										37.46	-38.74										37.48	-38.57										37.5	-39.31										37.52	-39.96										37.54	-38.57										37.56	-38.66										37.58	-38.48										37.6	-39.6										37.62	-39.02										37.64	-38.71										37.66	-39.18										37.68	-38.56										37.7	-38.72										37.72	-39.31										37.74	-38.74										37.76	-39.11										37.78	-38.91										37.8	-39.03										37.82	-39.37										37.84	-38.76										37.86	-39.66										37.88	-39.18										37.9	-38.92										37.92	-39.18										37.94	-38.96										37.96	-38.12										37.98	-39.07										38	-38.88										38.02	-38.16										38.04	-38.75										38.06	-39.01										38.08	-38.68										38.1	-38.2										38.12	-37.86										38.14	-38.21										38.16	-38.55										38.18	-37.56										38.2	-39.57										38.22	-42.1										38.24	-41.85										38.26	-42.11										38.28	-42.12										38.3	-42.05										38.32	-42.61										38.34	-43.28										38.36	-43.46										38.38	-41.5										38.4	-43.54										38.42	-39.93										38.44	-41.9										38.46	-43.59										38.48	-41.9										38.5	-41.44										38.52	-44.3										38.54	-42.96										38.56	-43.08										38.58	-41.78										38.6	-44.31										38.62	-42.16										38.64	-42.79										38.66	-42.7										38.68	-43.76										38.7	-44.41										38.72	-42.34										38.74	-43.45										38.76	-42.74										38.78	-44.21										38.8	-43.2										38.82	-43.36										38.84	-43.54										38.86	-42.43										38.88	-41.66										38.9	-42.85										38.92	-43.24										38.94	-41.33										38.96	-42.47										38.98	-41.71										39	-43.85										39.02	-44.43										39.04	-45.17										39.06	-42.07										39.08	-43.1										39.1	-44.61										39.12	-43.17										39.14	-43.69										39.16	-43.45										39.18	-42.3										39.2	-43.01										39.22	-44.16										39.24	-43.44										39.26	-44.23										39.28	-43.39										39.3	-42.58										39.32	-44.19										39.34	-42.37										39.36	-43.52										39.38	-43.76										39.4	-43.59										39.42	-41.9										39.44	-41.67										39.46	-44.66										39.48	-44.16										39.5	-44.37										39.52	-43.4										39.54	-42.23										39.56	-42.56										39.58	-41.71										39.6	-44.69										39.62	-43.45										39.64	-43.01										39.66	-42.35										39.68	-42.5										39.7	-43.11										39.72	-44.25										39.74	-42.15										39.76	-43.66										39.78	-42.31										39.8	-42.86										39.82	-44.08										39.84	-43.53										39.86	-43.53										39.88	-42.6										39.9	-42.21										39.92	-42.2										39.94	-42.17										39.96	-41.63										39.98	-40.84										40	-40.33										40.02	-40.84										40.04	-40.71										40.06	-40.49										40.08	-39.68										40.1	-40.58										40.12	-39.43										40.14	-40.85										40.16	-42.54										40.18	-43.71										40.2	-42.57										40.22	-42.11										40.24	-42.51										40.26	-42.07										40.28	-42.5										40.3	-42.13										40.32	-41.98										40.34	-42.4										40.36	-42.38										40.38	-41.77										40.4	-42.43										40.42	-42.25										40.44	-43										40.46	-42.07										40.48	-42.29										40.5	-41.79										40.52	-41.9										40.54	-42.44										40.56	-43.41										40.58	-42.98										40.6	-42.59										40.62	-45.41										40.64	-42.57										40.66	-42.49										40.68	-42.85										40.7	-44.29										40.72	-42.53										40.74	-44.53										40.76	-43.81										40.78	-43.21										40.8	-41.05										40.82	-42.61										40.84	-41.47										40.86	-42.65										40.88	-41.95										40.9	-42.37										40.92	-41.29										40.94	-42.17										40.96	-40.42										40.98	-41.16										41	-40.81										41.02	-39.6										41.04	-39.82										41.06	-40.35										41.08	-39.59										41.1	-39.24										41.12	-40.35										41.14	-39.71										41.16	-41.29										41.18	-39.23										41.2	-39.37										41.22	-40.12										41.24	-39.84										41.26	-39.96										41.28	-38.36										41.3	-39.47										41.32	-39.41										41.34	-39.95										41.36	-38.95										41.38	-38.83										41.4	-38.57										41.42	-38.36										41.44	-39.8										41.46	-41.78										41.48	-43.23										41.5	-42.26										41.52	-41.3										41.54	-43.5										41.56	-42.76										41.58	-42.7										41.6	-41.76										41.62	-42.31										41.64	-41.66										41.66	-43.61										41.68	-42.92										41.7	-41.92										41.72	-41.69										41.74	-43.75										41.76	-43.29										41.78	-43.59										41.8	-42.86										41.82	-42.25										41.84	-41.81										41.86	-42.54										41.88	-43.07										41.9	-43.67										41.92	-42.5										41.94	-42.03										41.96	-42.84										41.98	-43.18										42	-43.95										42.02	-41.98										42.04	-42.11										42.06	-43.49										42.08	-42.24										42.1	-42.65										42.12	-41.51										42.14	-41.73										42.16	-42.13										42.18	-42.27										42.2	-42.17										42.22	-42.03										42.24	-41.73										42.26	-42.67										42.28	-40.56										42.3	-39.57										42.32	-41.49										42.34	-40.64										42.36	-41.24										42.38	-40.76										42.4	-40.8										42.42	-40.28										42.44	-41.63										42.46	-41.75										42.48	-41.86										42.5	-41.12										42.52	-40.61										42.54	-41.02										42.56	-41.65										42.58	-40.94										42.6	-39.97										42.62	-40.39										42.64	-41.03										42.66	-40.64										42.68	-39.67										42.7	-39.29										42.72	-40.4										42.74	-39.39										42.76	-39.66										42.78	-40.22										42.8	-39.54										42.82	-39.43										42.84	-39.53										42.86	-39.48										42.88	-39.83										42.9	-38.67										42.92	-38.99										42.94	-39.05										42.96	-39.64										42.98	-39.36										43	-38.48										43.02	-38.04										43.04	-38.63										43.06	-38.72										43.08	-38.05										43.1	-38.8										43.12	-39.55										43.14	-38.84										43.16	-39.53										43.18	-39.75										43.2	-40.75										43.22	-39.46										43.24	-38.95										43.26	-39.67										43.28	-39.32										43.3	-38.46										43.32	-39.93										43.34	-41.07										43.36	-42.46										43.38	-41.46										43.4	-41.49										43.42	-42										43.44	-42.98										43.46	-43.84										43.48	-42.62										43.5	-43.83										43.52	-42.33										43.54	-43.6										43.56	-43.79										43.58	-43.99										43.6	-44.16										43.62	-43.36										43.64	-43.2										43.66	-42.08										43.68	-42.88										43.7	-41.55										43.72	-42.21										43.74	-42.86										43.76	-41.84										43.78	-42.67										43.8	-41.51										43.82	-42.92										43.84	-40.41										43.86	-42.66										43.88	-42.07										43.9	-42.93										43.92	-44.02										43.94	-42.25										43.96	-44.84										43.98	-41.3										44	-41.82										44.02	-42.69										44.04	-41.92										44.06	-43.61										44.08	-43.07										44.1	-42.67										44.12	-43.81										44.14	-43.67										44.16	-43.52										44.18	-41.84										44.2	-41.67										44.22	-43.37										44.24	-43.13										44.26	-44.07										44.28	-41.51										44.3	-41.99										44.32	-41.75										44.34	-41.75										44.36	-41.13										44.38	-39.87										44.4	-39.46										44.42	-40.84										44.44	-39.81										44.46	-40.26										44.48	-39.31										44.5	-40.57										44.52	-41.04										44.54	-40.46										44.56	-41.51										44.58	-42.57										44.6	-41.59										44.62	-41.78										44.64	-41.39										44.66	-42.17										44.68	-40.6										44.7	-40.23										44.72	-40.66										44.74	-41.39										44.76	-40.17										44.78	-41.69										44.8	-41.53										44.82	-40.83										44.84	-40.59										44.86	-42.53										44.88	-42.02										44.9	-41.25										44.92	-41.16										44.94	-41.5										44.96	-40.01										44.98	-41.03										45	-39.73										45.02	-41.47										45.04	-40.79										45.06	-40.94										45.08	-40.88										45.1	-40.74										45.12	-39.95										45.14	-41.68										45.16	-41.06										45.18	-40.33										45.2	-39.92										45.22	-40.37										45.24	-40.18										45.26	-41.71										45.28	-39.81										45.3	-41.23										45.32	-41.38										45.34	-40.48										45.36	-41.17										45.38	-40.53										45.4	-40.49										45.42	-40.39										45.44	-39.14										45.46	-39.64										45.48	-39.44										45.5	-40.56										45.52	-40										45.54	-40.05										45.56	-40.55										45.58	-39.2										45.6	-39.24										45.62	-39.17										45.64	-40.16										45.66	-39.21										45.68	-38.94										45.7	-39.76										45.72	-39.71										45.74	-39.26										45.76	-39.95										45.78	-38.81										45.8	-39.43										45.82	-40.45										45.84	-39.17										45.86	-39.71										45.88	-38.9										45.9	-39.47										45.92	-39.05										45.94	-39.58										45.96	-40.4										45.98	-39										46	-39.4										46.02	-38.71										46.04	-38.02										46.06	-38.41										46.08	-38.81										46.1	-39.36										46.12	-39.37										46.14	-38.98										46.16	-38.63										46.18	-39.09										46.2	-38.86										46.22	-38.64										46.24	-38.72										46.26	-38.93										46.28	-38.85										46.3	-38.91										46.32	-39.55										46.34	-38.47										46.36	-39.21										46.38	-38.58										46.4	-39.33										46.42	-39.09										46.44	-38.65										46.46	-38										46.48	-37.42										46.5	-38.3										46.52	-38.56										46.54	-38.55										46.56	-39.01										46.58	-39.41										46.6	-38.63										46.62	-37.78										46.64	-37.45										46.66	-38.34										46.68	-38.24										46.7	-37.63										46.72	-37.72										46.74	-38.25										46.76	-38.44										46.78	-37.21										46.8	-37.28										46.82	-37.07										46.84	-41.04										46.86	-40.54										46.88	-43.61										46.9	-41										46.92	-42.64										46.94	-41.6										46.96	-43.01										46.98	-42.54										47	-42.82										47.02	-43.35										47.04	-42.88										47.06	-43.09										47.08	-42.53										47.1	-41.25										47.12	-41.9										47.14	-42.84										47.16	-44.26										47.18	-42.85										47.2	-41.66										47.22	-42.6										47.24	-43.72										47.26	-42.87										47.28	-43.23										47.3	-41.8										47.32	-41.91										47.34	-41.73										47.36	-42.26										47.38	-42.54										47.4	-43.06										47.42	-44.67										47.44	-42.14										47.46	-44.61										47.48	-43.89										47.5	-43.67										47.52	-43.73										47.54	-41.16										47.56	-42.81										47.58	-41.37										47.6	-42.42										47.62	-41.32										47.64	-42.1										47.66	-42.86										47.68	-43.38										47.7	-42.45										47.72	-43.48										47.74	-44.6										47.76	-43.97										47.78	-42.98										47.8	-43.78										47.82	-43.07										47.84	-40.51										47.86	-42.19										47.88	-42.64										47.9	-43.41										47.92	-43.94										47.94	-41.85										47.96	-43.64										47.98	-42.3										48	-44.09										48.02	-41.8										48.04	-42.51										48.06	-43.67										48.08	-43.39										48.1	-43.27										48.12	-44.52										48.14	-45.08										48.16	-43.78										48.18	-43.74										48.2	-42.94										48.22	-42.87										48.24	-44.33										48.26	-43.6										48.28	-42.79										48.3	-43.34										48.32	-42.86										48.34	-41.47										48.36	-42.35										48.38	-42.54										48.4	-42.98										48.42	-41.4										48.44	-43										48.46	-41.32										48.48	-41.67										48.5	-41.17										48.52	-40.5										48.54	-40.55										48.56	-40.91										48.58	-41.68										48.6	-41.53										48.62	-41.43										48.64	-41.11										48.66	-40.42										48.68	-42.02										48.7	-41.22										48.72	-40.4										48.74	-40.57										48.76	-41.62										48.78	-40.68										48.8	-41.44										48.82	-40.99										48.84	-39.54										48.86	-39.92										48.88	-40.05										48.9	-39.92										48.92	-39.6										48.94	-39.06										48.96	-39.74										48.98	-39.66										49	-39.19										49.02	-40.25										49.04	-40.31										49.06	-41.91										49.08	-41.97										49.1	-42.21										49.12	-40.65										49.14	-39.61										49.16	-39.94										49.18	-39.18										49.2	-39.01										49.22	-39.38										49.24	-38.41										49.26	-40.43										49.28	-41.19										49.3	-41.92										49.32	-40.94										49.34	-42.38										49.36	-41.99										49.38	-42.45										49.4	-42.67										49.42	-41.75										49.44	-42.03										49.46	-41.52										49.48	-41.13										49.5	-41.51										49.52	-41.24										49.54	-40.7										49.56	-41.78										49.58	-41.1										49.6	-40.94										49.62	-39.93										49.64	-40.7										49.66	-39.94										49.68	-40.8										49.7	-40.3										49.72	-40.07										49.74	-40.6										49.76	-40.9										49.78	-40.04										49.8	-40.84										49.82	-40.53										49.84	-40.32										49.86	-40.27										49.88	-41.31										49.9	-40.92										49.92	-41.14										49.94	-40.41										49.96	-41.13										49.98	-40.84										50	-39.81										50.02	-39.06										50.04	-41.17										50.06	-39.59										50.08	-40.68										50.1	-41.09										50.12	-41.47										50.14	-39.96										50.16	-40.59										50.18	-40.77										50.2	-40.33										50.22	-40.25										50.24	-40.17										50.26	-41.2										50.28	-41.43										50.3	-39.98										50.32	-41.39										50.34	-40.95										50.36	-40.19										50.38	-40.22										50.4	-40.4										50.42	-40.65										50.44	-40.24										50.46	-41.38										50.48	-39.87										50.5	-38.81										50.52	-40.7										50.54	-40.37										50.56	-40.68										50.58	-41.09										50.6	-40.35										50.62	-40.5										50.64	-39.92										50.66	-39.22										50.68	-40.86										50.7	-40.2										50.72	-40.23										50.74	-40.73										50.76	-39.99										50.78	-40.68										50.8	-40.21										50.82	-41.12										50.84	-40.64										50.86	-39.87										50.88	-40.34										50.9	-39.7										50.92	-40.39										50.94	-41.87										50.96	-40.62										50.98	-39.65										51	-41.01										51.02	-39.96										51.04	-39.87										51.06	-40.24										51.08	-40.03										51.1	-41.29										51.12	-40.88										51.14	-40.19										51.16	-41.3										51.18	-40.02										51.2	-39.82										51.22	-41.12										51.24	-40.32										51.26	-41.07										51.28	-41.28										51.3	-40.56										51.32	-39.83										51.34	-39.41										51.36	-40.77										51.38	-39.71										51.4	-40.24										51.42	-39.78										51.44	-39.91										51.46	-40.25										51.48	-40.87										51.5	-41.87										51.52	-40.51										51.54	-40.62										51.56	-41.42										51.58	-41.74										51.6	-40.3										51.62	-41.8										51.64	-40.17										51.66	-39.46										51.68	-38.91										51.7	-39.02										51.72	-38.98										51.74	-39.41										51.76	-39.36										51.78	-39.49										51.8	-40.19										51.82	-40.39										51.84	-39.45										51.86	-39.78										51.88	-39.7										51.9	-39.96										51.92	-38.57										51.94	-39.45										51.96	-39.3										51.98	-39.09										52	-39.41										52.02	-39.58										52.04	-39.81										52.06	-39.89										52.08	-39.46										52.1	-39.04										52.12	-38.81										52.14	-39.42										52.16	-39.29										52.18	-38.9										52.2	-38.3										52.22	-39										52.24	-38.65										52.26	-39.75										52.28	-39.02										52.3	-39.96										52.32	-39.05										52.34	-39.5										52.36	-39.92										52.38	-40.07										52.4	-38.9										52.42	-39.69										52.44	-39.18										52.46	-38.79										52.48	-38.19										52.5	-39.45										52.52	-39.89										52.54	-39.46										52.56	-38.68										52.58	-38.83										52.6	-39.88										52.62	-40.09										52.64	-39.55										52.66	-39.45										52.68	-39.4										52.7	-39.73										52.72	-39.35										52.74	-39.87										52.76	-39.43										52.78	-38.43										52.8	-39.6										52.82	-39.09										52.84	-39.31										52.86	-38.96										52.88	-39.7										52.9	-39.33										52.92	-39.42										52.94	-39.34										52.96	-39.1										52.98	-39.41										53	-38.21										53.02	-39.12										53.04	-38.83										53.06	-39.6										53.08	-39.59										53.1	-39.29										53.12	-39.43										53.14	-38.54										53.16	-40.55										53.18	-39.06										53.2	-38.49										53.22	-38.28										53.24	-38.59										53.26	-38.72										53.28	-38.82										53.3	-39.65										53.32	-39.76										53.34	-37.89										53.36	-38.21										53.38	-39.59										53.4	-39.37										53.42	-38.68										53.44	-38.85										53.46	-39.25										53.48	-38.15										53.5	-39.24										53.52	-38.72										53.54	-39.14										53.56	-38.33										53.58	-38.88										53.6	-38.06										53.62	-37.98										53.64	-39.64										53.66	-38.77										53.68	-39.78										53.7	-39.12										53.72	-39.01										53.74	-39.73										53.76	-38.38										53.78	-38.29										53.8	-38.87										53.82	-38.26										53.84	-38.31										53.86	-37.7										53.88	-37.51										53.9	-38.21										53.92	-38.79										53.94	-38.85										53.96	-41.19										53.98	-41.35										54	-41.61										54.02	-39.31										54.04	-38.65										54.06	-38.44										54.08	-38.94										54.1	-38.62										54.12	-39.14										54.14	-39.18										54.16	-39.6										54.18	-37.77										54.2	-39.97										54.22	-43.61										54.24	-41.94										54.26	-42.59										54.28	-42.82										54.3	-43.08										54.32	-41.81										54.34	-42.99										54.36	-42.09										54.38	-43										54.4	-42.67										54.42	-43.26										54.44	-41.78										54.46	-43.68										54.48	-43.64										54.5	-42.43										54.52	-42.62										54.54	-43.23										54.56	-42.69										54.58	-42.01										54.6	-42.17										54.62	-43.15										54.64	-42.62										54.66	-41.76										54.68	-42.69										54.7	-42.34										54.72	-43.01										54.74	-42.69										54.76	-40.82										54.78	-41.06										54.8	-43.42										54.82	-40.95										54.84	-42.64										54.86	-41.01										54.88	-41.14										54.9	-39.07										54.92	-37.65										54.94	-37.08										54.96	-38.86										54.98	-40.24										55	-43.13										55.02	-42.29										55.04	-42.99										55.06	-42.86										55.08	-42.46										55.1	-44.02										55.12	-41.1										55.14	-41.81										55.16	-43.61										55.18	-42.12										55.2	-42.75										55.22	-43.58										55.24	-42.05										55.26	-43.98										55.28	-43.42										55.3	-42.57										55.32	-40.95										55.34	-41.55										55.36	-41.27										55.38	-41.3										55.4	-42.1										55.42	-39.68										55.44	-37.81										55.46	-39.34										55.48	-39.2										55.5	-39.55										55.52	-38.67										55.54	-39.96										55.56	-38.98										55.58	-40										55.6	-39.56										55.62	-39.5										55.64	-39.36										55.66	-39.3										55.68	-38.21										55.7	-39.07										55.72	-38.97										55.74	-39.78										55.76	-39.86										55.78	-41.11										55.8	-41.97										55.82	-44.05										55.84	-43.91										55.86	-40.64										55.88	-43.12										55.9	-43.59										55.92	-43.54										55.94	-42.49										55.96	-42.05										55.98	-44.25										56	-42.34										56.02	-42.23										56.04	-42.97										56.06	-43.21										56.08	-42.25										56.1	-41.86										56.12	-41.46										56.14	-41.99										56.16	-43.07										56.18	-43.27										56.2	-42.32										56.22	-41.83										56.24	-40.97										56.26	-43.51										56.28	-42.84										56.3	-41.9										56.32	-41.7										56.34	-42.35										56.36	-43.52										56.38	-41.84										56.4	-41.52										56.42	-42.1										56.44	-42.34										56.46	-41.27										56.48	-41.06										56.5	-41.36										56.52	-40.79										56.54	-41.5										56.56	-41.27										56.58	-41.05										56.6	-40.6										56.62	-40.26										56.64	-40.55										56.66	-40.82										56.68	-39.76										56.7	-39.54										56.72	-40.32										56.74	-40										56.76	-40.22										56.78	-40.49										56.8	-39.29										56.82	-40.34										56.84	-41.05										56.86	-41.41										56.88	-40.03										56.9	-40.16										56.92	-40.1										56.94	-40.57										56.96	-41.01										56.98	-40.61										57	-39.38										57.02	-40.95										57.04	-41.48										57.06	-41.67										57.08	-40.14										57.1	-40.84										57.12	-40.48										57.14	-40.79										57.16	-40.67										57.18	-39.52										57.2	-40.79										57.22	-40.53										57.24	-40.42										57.26	-40.64										57.28	-40.69										57.3	-40										57.32	-39.91										57.34	-39.32										57.36	-39.7										57.38	-39.72										57.4	-40.47										57.42	-39.37										57.44	-39.62										57.46	-39.23										57.48	-40.64										57.5	-39.18										57.52	-39.04										57.54	-39.48										57.56	-40.01										57.58	-38.15										57.6	-39.16										57.62	-39.65										57.64	-38.46										57.66	-40.59										57.68	-39.21										57.7	-39.59										57.72	-39.51										57.74	-39.09										57.76	-38.8										57.78	-38.59										57.8	-38.77										57.82	-38.87										57.84	-38.79										57.86	-38.27										57.88	-39.59										57.9	-39.94										57.92	-40.24										57.94	-40.01										57.96	-40										57.98	-38.17										58	-38.26										58.02	-38.91										58.04	-42.2										58.06	-42.11										58.08	-41.44										58.1	-42.92										58.12	-41.18										58.14	-42.55										58.16	-40.53										58.18	-38.36										58.2	-38.99										58.22	-37.85										58.24	-38.73										58.26	-42.08										58.28	-41.83										58.3	-41.02										58.32	-43.13										58.34	-42.12										58.36	-43.12										58.38	-41.88										58.4	-43.51										58.42	-41.91										58.44	-41.99										58.46	-42.28										58.48	-43.35										58.5	-42.04										58.52	-42.58										58.54	-41.91										58.56	-40.68										58.58	-40.96										58.6	-40.94										58.62	-39.04										58.64	-39.35										58.66	-39.01										58.68	-39.93										58.7	-38.2										58.72	-39.35										58.74	-39.84										58.76	-40.36										58.78	-41.5										58.8	-40.6										58.82	-40.55										58.84	-40.33										58.86	-38.87										58.88	-39.36										58.9	-38.45										58.92	-38.64										58.94	-38.42										58.96	-37.89										58.98	-38.38										59	-38.17										59.02	-37.57										59.04	-37.82										59.06	-40.83										59.08	-42.2										59.1	-42.69										59.12	-41.94										59.14	-44.19										59.16	-41.74										59.18	-42.68										59.2	-43.09										59.22	-44.35										59.24	-42.72										59.26	-41.31										59.28	-42.43										59.3	-40.49										59.32	-37.61										59.34	-38.46										59.36	-37.72										59.38	-37.68										59.4	-38.18										59.42	-39.77										59.44	-42.31										59.46	-41.84										59.48	-41.75										59.5	-42.8										59.52	-44.28										59.54	-44.19										59.56	-42.51										59.58	-43.72										59.6	-43.69										59.62	-42.77										59.64	-43.32										59.66	-42.63										59.68	-42.91										59.7	-42.1										59.72	-41.66										59.74	-41.95										59.76	-43.76										59.78	-42.77										59.8	-44.05										59.82	-44.15										59.84	-43.67										59.86	-42.11										59.88	-43.89										59.9	-42.7										59.92	-41.57										59.94	-42.87										59.96	-43.54										59.98	-43.39										60	-42.33										60.02	-43.8										60.04	-42.58										60.06	-43.15										60.08	-43.65										60.1	-43.4										60.12	-43.68										60.14	-42.45										60.16	-43.31										60.18	-43.94										60.2	-42.96										60.22	-43.19										60.24	-42.05										60.26	-42.87										60.28	-42.46										60.3	-42.47										60.32	-44.03										60.34	-42.56										60.36	-42.18										60.38	-44.35										60.4	-43.82										60.42	-42.01										60.44	-44.4										60.46	-42.61										60.48	-43.02										60.5	-43.01										60.52	-42.65										60.54	-42.63										60.56	-43.13										60.58	-43.44										60.6	-43.34										60.62	-43.57										60.64	-42.04										60.66	-43.88										60.68	-42.48										60.7	-43.48										60.72	-43.38										60.74	-43.88										60.76	-43.67										60.78	-42.52										60.8	-45.05										60.82	-43.14										60.84	-43.6										60.86	-44.12										60.88	-43.55										60.9	-43.84										60.92	-42.21										60.94	-43.12										60.96	-44.37										60.98	-44.03										61	-43.76										61.02	-46.01										61.04	-42.1										61.06	-42.75										61.08	-44.63										61.1	-43.82										61.12	-45.19										61.14	-42.96										61.16	-42.83										61.18	-43.78										61.2	-43.16										61.22	-44.39										61.24	-42.67										61.26	-44.23										61.28	-43.93										61.3	-43.75										61.32	-43.33										61.34	-43.94										61.36	-41.68										61.38	-41.87										61.4	-42.96										61.42	-44.34										61.44	-43.52										61.46	-42.63										61.48	-43.59										61.5	-44.96										61.52	-44.84										61.54	-44.98										61.56	-45.39										61.58	-44.4										61.6	-44.26										61.62	-42.8										61.64	-43.31										61.66	-43.69										61.68	-43.09										61.7	-42.9										61.72	-43.07										61.74	-42.78										61.76	-43.58										61.78	-45.76										61.8	-43.86										61.82	-44.7										61.84	-44.72										61.86	-44.35										61.88	-42.93										61.9	-42.91										61.92	-43.53										61.94	-44.64										61.96	-43.05										61.98	-43.36										62	-44.66										62.02	-46.34										62.04	-43.77										62.06	-44.02										62.08	-45.04										62.1	-44.42										62.12	-43.65										62.14	-43.83										62.16	-42.58										62.18	-42.81										62.2	-45.22										62.22	-44.97										62.24	-44.91										62.26	-43.23										62.28	-43.82										62.3	-44.38										62.32	-44.38										62.34	-44.02										62.36	-43.16										62.38	-44.06										62.4	-44.24										62.42	-44.25										62.44	-46.42										62.46	-43.98										62.48	-44.86										62.5	-43.96										62.52	-44.55										62.54	-45.44										62.56	-43.96										62.58	-44.42										62.6	-44.3										62.62	-44.43										62.64	-42.57										62.66	-43.42										62.68	-45.67										62.7	-46.11										62.72	-45.3										62.74	-45.1										62.76	-43.75										62.78	-44.26										62.8	-42.98										62.82	-43.14										62.84	-43.73										62.86	-44.71										62.88	-45.93										62.9	-44.22										62.92	-44.17										62.94	-44.3										62.96	-43.93										62.98	-43.57										63	-43.31										63.02	-44.11										63.04	-44.4										63.06	-45.04										63.08	-45.36										63.1	-44.27										63.12	-44.52										63.14	-43.89										63.16	-44.13										63.18	-45.17										63.2	-44.35										63.22	-44.63										63.24	-42.19										63.26	-44.98										63.28	-43.51										63.3	-43.39										63.32	-44.31										63.34	-42.24										63.36	-42.89										63.38	-42.82										63.4	-43.23										63.42	-43.27										63.44	-43.33										63.46	-43.02										63.48	-44.51										63.5	-43.66										63.52	-43.64										63.54	-43.49										63.56	-42.42										63.58	-43.23										63.6	-43.42										63.62	-43.02										63.64	-43.12										63.66	-43.06										63.68	-44.06										63.7	-43.56										63.72	-44.91										63.74	-44.09										63.76	-44.62										63.78	-43.1										63.8	-43.53										63.82	-43.92										63.84	-43.16										63.86	-40.94										63.88	-39.43										63.9	-39.5										63.92	-40.65										63.94	-40.09										63.96	-39.85										63.98	-39.78										64	-40.13										64.02	-39.99										64.04	-38.54										64.06	-39.95										64.08	-40.83										64.1	-42.23										64.12	-41.56										64.14	-43.4										64.16	-42.73										64.18	-42.65										64.2	-45.36										64.22	-44.23										64.24	-43.96										64.26	-42.77										64.28	-42.45										64.3	-42.48										64.32	-45.42										64.34	-43.27										64.36	-43.9										64.38	-44.24										64.4	-43.98										64.42	-43.22										64.44	-44.03										64.46	-45.77										64.48	-44.91										64.5	-44.78										64.52	-45.85										64.54	-44.82										64.56	-44.12										64.58	-44.73										64.6	-45.28										64.62	-42.84										64.64	-43.61										64.66	-46.24										64.68	-44.63										64.7	-43.82										64.72	-44.62										64.74	-43.14										64.76	-42.12										64.78	-42.82										64.8	-44.6										64.82	-44.01										64.84	-43.54										64.86	-44.73										64.88	-43.62										64.9	-43.59										64.92	-43.19										64.94	-45.05										64.96	-42.24										64.98	-42.41										65	-42.89										65.02	-44.87										65.04	-43.71										65.06	-43.72										65.08	-44.44										65.1	-43.26										65.12	-43.41										65.14	-43.82										65.16	-42.55										65.18	-42.4										65.2	-43.9										65.22	-43.1										65.24	-42.79										65.26	-41.93										65.28	-44.38										65.3	-45.5										65.32	-43.88										65.34	-45										65.36	-44.24										65.38	-44.15										65.4	-44.91										65.42	-44.22										65.44	-43.24										65.46	-44.7										65.48	-44.42										65.5	-43.8										65.52	-45.56										65.54	-43.58										65.56	-45.17										65.58	-44.29										65.6	-44.08										65.62	-42.4										65.64	-44.04										65.66	-43.29										65.68	-45.03										65.7	-42.96										65.72	-44.92										65.74	-44.37										65.76	-43.4										65.78	-44.84										65.8	-45.6										65.82	-44.27										65.84	-46.12										65.86	-44.41										65.88	-43.87										65.9	-44.78										65.92	-44.88										65.94	-43.9										65.96	-43.35										65.98	-45.14										66	-44.3										66.02	-43.41										66.04	-45										66.06	-43.5										66.08	-43.14										66.1	-45.52										66.12	-43.31										66.14	-42.4										66.16	-44.4										66.18	-44.48										66.2	-42.11										66.22	-42.53										66.24	-43.64										66.26	-44.91										66.28	-44.26										66.3	-44.87										66.32	-42.87										66.34	-44.14										66.36	-42.92										66.38	-43.1										66.4	-44.85										66.42	-43.75										66.44	-45.37										66.46	-45.27										66.48	-43.89										66.5	-44.81										66.52	-44.38										66.54	-42.36										66.56	-43.41										66.58	-44.68										66.6	-45.05										66.62	-44.55										66.64	-44.3										66.66	-42.11										66.68	-42.45										66.7	-43.63										66.72	-42.21										66.74	-43.57										66.76	-44.26										66.78	-43.26										66.8	-44.18										66.82	-44.97										66.84	-42.9										66.86	-43.58										66.88	-43.74										66.9	-42.35										66.92	-42.88										66.94	-43.18										66.96	-44.33										66.98	-44.4										67	-44.09										67.02	-44.78										67.04	-44.77										67.06	-43.86										67.08	-42.09										67.1	-42.08										67.12	-43.77										67.14	-44.02										67.16	-45.32										67.18	-44.93										67.2	-44.78										67.22	-44.78										67.24	-43.85										67.26	-43.57										67.28	-43.07										67.3	-43.55										67.32	-42.73										67.34	-42.17										67.36	-42.47										67.38	-44.24										67.4	-40.51										67.42	-42.07										67.44	-43.2										67.46	-43.52										67.48	-42.5										67.5	-42.9										67.52	-42.59										67.54	-43.44										67.56	-44.6										67.58	-44.8										67.6	-45.15										67.62	-43										67.64	-43.13										67.66	-45.38										67.68	-45.18										67.7	-43.82										67.72	-44.71										67.74	-43.97										67.76	-43.19										67.78	-43.27										67.8	-43.43										67.82	-44.68										67.84	-44.49										67.86	-45.05										67.88	-44.13										67.9	-42.36										67.92	-44.4										67.94	-44.64										67.96	-42.62										67.98	-43.77										68	-44.99										68.02	-43.44										68.04	-46.05										68.06	-43.61										68.08	-44.34										68.1	-43.04										68.12	-43										68.14	-43.43										68.16	-45.75										68.18	-45.02										68.2	-43.38										68.22	-45.16										68.24	-43.33										68.26	-41.95										68.28	-42.87										68.3	-43.92										68.32	-44.74										68.34	-42.75										68.36	-43.3										68.38	-43.92										68.4	-43.35										68.42	-44.53										68.44	-45.34										68.46	-44.15										68.48	-45.04										68.5	-44										68.52	-45.31										68.54	-44.18										68.56	-42.72										68.58	-43.78										68.6	-43.91										68.62	-42.76										68.64	-43.54										68.66	-43.21										68.68	-43.99										68.7	-43.72										68.72	-43.88										68.74	-43.16										68.76	-44.85										68.78	-44.4										68.8	-44.42										68.82	-43.07										68.84	-42.39										68.86	-43.31										68.88	-44.62										68.9	-44.58										68.92	-42.87										68.94	-43.49										68.96	-44.38										68.98	-41.54										69	-41.71										69.02	-44.48										69.04	-41.96										69.06	-43.77										69.08	-44.29										69.1	-43.68										69.12	-44.41										69.14	-43.07										69.16	-43.38										69.18	-44.51										69.2	-44.7										69.22	-45.35										69.24	-44.28										69.26	-43.87										69.28	-43.59										69.3	-43.89										69.32	-43.2										69.34	-43.37										69.36	-42.62										69.38	-43.52										69.4	-42.05										69.42	-41.76										69.44	-40.34										69.46	-40.97										69.48	-39.97										69.5	-40.03										69.52	-40.04										69.54	-38.54										69.56	-39.33										69.58	-39.19										69.6	-40.92										69.62	-42.74										69.64	-43.73										69.66	-45.09										69.68	-44.3										69.7	-44.72										69.72	-44.8										69.74	-44.27										69.76	-42.66										69.78	-44.36										69.8	-44.88										69.82	-45.17										69.84	-43.99										69.86	-44.19										69.88	-44.35										69.9	-43.87										69.92	-44.12										69.94	-42.81										69.96	-43.22										69.98	-43.46										70	-45.09										70.02	-44.36										70.04	-44.1										70.06	-44.33										70.08	-42.54										70.1	-42.61										70.12	-43.48										70.14	-42.26										70.16	-42.59										70.18	-43.79										70.2	-42.49										70.22	-44.19										70.24	-44.29										70.26	-43.22										70.28	-43.23										70.3	-42.57										70.32	-44.08										70.34	-43.36										70.36	-43.96										70.38	-41.51										70.4	-42.12										70.42	-43.62										70.44	-41.28										70.46	-41.67										70.48	-41.78										70.5	-42.41										70.52	-42.17										70.54	-42.08										70.56	-42.22										70.58	-42.23										70.6	-41.59										70.62	-41.62										70.64	-41.6										70.66	-41.5										70.68	-42.36										70.7	-43.22										70.72	-42.16										70.74	-40.85										70.76	-41.82										70.78	-41.42										70.8	-42.77										70.82	-41.4										70.84	-40.73										70.86	-40.61										70.88	-40.19										70.9	-40.53										70.92	-40.8										70.94	-40.71										70.96	-40.11										70.98	-40.33										71	-39.17										71.02	-40.72										71.04	-39.64										71.06	-40.07										71.08	-40.22										71.1	-41.1										71.12	-40.39										71.14	-41.65										71.16	-40.53										71.18	-39.64										71.2	-39.21										71.22	-40.01										71.24	-39.9										71.26	-38.98										71.28	-39.84										71.3	-39.32										71.32	-40.25										71.34	-39.29										71.36	-39.71										71.38	-40.23										71.4	-39.9										71.42	-39.91										71.44	-40.08										71.46	-38.9										71.48	-39.34										71.5	-39.49										71.52	-39.55										71.54	-39.31										71.56	-39.23										71.58	-39.51										71.6	-40.11										71.62	-38.87										71.64	-40.07										71.66	-38.91										71.68	-39.02										71.7	-38.62										71.72	-39.27										71.74	-39.07										71.76	-39.22										71.78	-39.04										71.8	-38.26										71.82	-39.23										71.84	-38.21										71.86	-38.28										71.88	-38.72										71.9	-38.32										71.92	-38.45										71.94	-38.39										71.96	-38.1										71.98	-38.61										72	-37.75										72.02	-38.87										72.04	-37.93										72.06	-37.86										72.08	-37.77										72.1	-37.44										72.12	-37.15										72.14	-38.42										72.16	-38.3										72.18	-37.78										72.2	-37.26										72.22	-37.81										72.24	-38.12										72.26	-37.55										72.28	-38.48										72.3	-39.61										72.32	-41.3										72.34	-43.78										72.36	-43.2										72.38	-44.5										72.4	-43.95										72.42	-44.96										72.44	-44.13										72.46	-44.04										72.48	-43.02										72.5	-45.41										72.52	-43.46										72.54	-43.41										72.56	-43.92										72.58	-45.66										72.6	-45.56										72.62	-44.43										72.64	-44.43										72.66	-46.03										72.68	-44.86										72.7	-45.37										72.72	-43.84										72.74	-46.24										72.76	-44.77										72.78	-44.14										72.8	-44.13										72.82	-45.6										72.84	-44.25										72.86	-46										72.88	-44.69										72.9	-43.7										72.92	-44.07										72.94	-45										72.96	-44.89										72.98	-43.36										73	-45.42										73.02	-45.3										73.04	-45.09										73.06	-44.53										73.08	-45.6										73.1	-44.92										73.12	-44.3										73.14	-43.26										73.16	-43.51										73.18	-44.47										73.2	-44.79										73.22	-45.51										73.24	-44.84										73.26	-44.91										73.28	-44.77										73.3	-43.68										73.32	-44.44										73.34	-45.05										73.36	-46.26										73.38	-45.65										73.4	-46.01										73.42	-43.7										73.44	-44.26										73.46	-44.77										73.48	-45.06										73.5	-45.19										73.52	-45.25										73.54	-44.44										73.56	-45.06										73.58	-44.4										73.6	-43.19										73.62	-44.53										73.64	-45.02										73.66	-44.22										73.68	-44.42										73.7	-44.3										73.72	-44.89										73.74	-46.31										73.76	-44.84										73.78	-44.42										73.8	-44.06										73.82	-45.14										73.84	-43.97										73.86	-43.66										73.88	-43.77										73.9	-44.61										73.92	-44.48										73.94	-43.31										73.96	-44.33										73.98	-44.76										74	-45.34										74.02	-44.59										74.04	-43.67										74.06	-43.15										74.08	-42.63										74.1	-42.51										74.12	-42.75										74.14	-41.97										74.16	-42.94										74.18	-41.29										74.2	-41.53										74.22	-40.69										74.24	-40.35										74.26	-39.45										74.28	-39.53										74.3	-39.16										74.32	-40.58										74.34	-40.76										74.36	-40.81										74.38	-41.31										74.4	-41.76										74.42	-41.42										74.44	-40.44										74.46	-39.91										74.48	-40.79										74.5	-40.99										74.52	-40.56										74.54	-40.49										74.56	-40.35										74.58	-40.03										74.6	-39.69										74.62	-40.07										74.64	-39.87										74.66	-40.28										74.68	-39.73										74.7	-39.54										74.72	-39.76										74.74	-40.06										74.76	-38.77										74.78	-40.08										74.8	-38.72										74.82	-39.18										74.84	-39.66										74.86	-39.3										74.88	-39.06										74.9	-40.24										74.92	-39.7										74.94	-39.24										74.96	-39.96										74.98	-39.14										75	-39.49										75.02	-38.77										75.04	-39.45										75.06	-39.8										75.08	-39.53										75.1	-39.15										75.12	-39.04										75.14	-39.99										75.16	-39										75.18	-39										75.2	-39.66										75.22	-39.13										75.24	-38.65										75.26	-39.59										75.28	-39.11										75.3	-39.3										75.32	-39.56										75.34	-38.38										75.36	-39.99										75.38	-39.89										75.4	-38.97										75.42	-39.47										75.44	-39.09										75.46	-39.28										75.48	-39.2										75.5	-39.1										75.52	-38.72										75.54	-38.88										75.56	-39.94										75.58	-37.93										75.6	-37.74										75.62	-38.48										75.64	-39.08										75.66	-38.46										75.68	-38.84										75.7	-38.82										75.72	-38.46										75.74	-38.93										75.76	-38.61										75.78	-39.08										75.8	-38.65										75.82	-38.45										75.84	-37.69										75.86	-38.83										75.88	-37.69										75.9	-37.97										75.92	-38.55										75.94	-38.07										75.96	-38.56										75.98	-38.34										76	-38.46										76.02	-37.88										76.04	-38.27										76.06	-37.92										76.08	-37.98										76.1	-37.63										76.12	-38.58										76.14	-37.58										76.16	-37.78										76.18	-37.81										76.2	-37.27										76.22	-36.94										76.24	-37.63										76.26	-38.04										76.28	-37.21										76.3	-37.9										76.32	-37.13										76.34	-36.56										76.36	-36.55										76.38	-36.89										76.4	-37.98										76.42	-37.64										76.44	-41.69										76.46	-41.75										76.48	-41.82										76.5	-42.53										76.52	-43.75										76.54	-42.99										76.56	-42.54										76.58	-42.64										76.6	-42.12										76.62	-42.22										76.64	-42.38										76.66	-42.64										76.68	-42.24										76.7	-43.13										76.72	-41.7										76.74	-42.49										76.76	-42.74										76.78	-44.57										76.8	-42.66										76.82	-42.97										76.84	-44.03										76.86	-42.31										76.88	-41.35										76.9	-42.87										76.92	-42.82										76.94	-44.22										76.96	-42.59										76.98	-43.38										77	-41.98										77.02	-42.21										77.04	-42.41										77.06	-42										77.08	-42.65										77.1	-43.25										77.12	-42.33										77.14	-43.51										77.16	-43.34										77.18	-42.49										77.2	-43.29										77.22	-42.96										77.24	-42.04										77.26	-42.84										77.28	-41.7										77.3	-42.4										77.32	-42.58										77.34	-44.59										77.36	-43.18										77.38	-43.03										77.4	-43.21										77.42	-42.67										77.44	-44.61										77.46	-42.86										77.48	-42.7										77.5	-43.75										77.52	-42.41										77.54	-42.35										77.56	-42.38										77.58	-41.97										77.6	-43.15										77.62	-42.57										77.64	-42.92										77.66	-42.45										77.68	-42.36										77.7	-42.71										77.72	-41.68										77.74	-42.04										77.76	-41.03										77.78	-40.73										77.8	-41.26										77.82	-41.86										77.84	-39.79										77.86	-39.55										77.88	-39.01										77.9	-39.24										77.92	-38.83										77.94	-39.64										77.96	-38.58										77.98	-39.54										78	-38.94										78.02	-38.64										78.04	-39.7										78.06	-39.97										78.08	-40.26										78.1	-40.41										78.12	-40.26										78.14	-41.07										78.16	-40.83										78.18	-40.47										78.2	-42.07										78.22	-40.65										78.24	-41.59										78.26	-40.62										78.28	-40.69										78.3	-41.04										78.32	-40.44										78.34	-41.51										78.36	-41.15										78.38	-40.34										78.4	-40.93										78.42	-39.67										78.44	-40.35										78.46	-39.71										78.48	-39.66										78.5	-40.83										78.52	-40.77										78.54	-39.96										78.56	-40.71										78.58	-40.3										78.6	-40.1										78.62	-40.27										78.64	-40.74										78.66	-40.14										78.68	-40.43										78.7	-40.63										78.72	-40.32										78.74	-39.04										78.76	-39.32										78.78	-39.11										78.8	-39.54										78.82	-39.22										78.84	-39.47										78.86	-38.79										78.88	-38.49										78.9	-39										78.92	-39.63										78.94	-39.36										78.96	-38.65										78.98	-38.91										79	-38.47										79.02	-39.1										79.04	-39.08										79.06	-39.69										79.08	-39.5										79.1	-39.23										79.12	-39.47										79.14	-38.42										79.16	-38.51										79.18	-38.66										79.2	-37.88										79.22	-38.98										79.24	-40.24										79.26	-40.68										79.28	-41.01										79.3	-41.04										79.32	-39.6										79.34	-41.55										79.36	-40										79.38	-39.99										79.4	-40.68										79.42	-39.94										79.44	-39.93										79.46	-39.42										79.48	-39.89										79.5	-40.28										79.52	-40.07										79.54	-39.97										79.56	-40.78										79.58	-40.34										79.6	-39.59										79.62	-39										79.64	-39.85										79.66	-40.76										79.68	-41.19										79.7	-38.82										79.72	-40.28										79.74	-40.34										79.76	-40.01										79.78	-39.87										79.8	-39.35										79.82	-40.09										79.84	-40.18										79.86	-39										79.88	-39.1										79.9	-39.76										79.92	-39.14										79.94	-39.84										79.96	-39.92										79.98	-39.72										80	-39.71										80.02	-39.21										80.04	-39.13										80.06	-39.32										80.08	-40.03										80.1	-39.16										80.12	-38.86										80.14	-39.36										80.16	-39.59										80.18	-39.04										80.2	-37.79										80.22	-39.91										80.24	-39.54										80.26	-39.16										80.28	-40.35										80.3	-39.55										80.32	-39.1										80.34	-38.73										80.36	-40.03										80.38	-39.51										80.4	-39.4										80.42	-39.32										80.44	-39.46										80.46	-39.44										80.48	-38.79										80.5	-38.73										80.52	-38.43										80.54	-38.91										80.56	-38.88										80.58	-40.11										80.6	-38.04										80.62	-38.42										80.64	-39.99										80.66	-39.33										80.68	-39.75										80.7	-39.29										80.72	-39.04										80.74	-38.66										80.76	-38.57										80.78	-38.71										80.8	-39.26										80.82	-38.01										80.84	-38.36										80.86	-38.91										80.88	-38.64										80.9	-38.15										80.92	-38.57										80.94	-38.84										80.96	-38.66										80.98	-39.11										81	-38.75										81.02	-38.33										81.04	-38.08										81.06	-37.66										81.08	-39.74										81.1	-38.32										81.12	-38.09										81.14	-38.76										81.16	-39.02										81.18	-38.03										81.2	-38.17										81.22	-38.31										81.24	-38.4										81.26	-38.28										81.28	-37.8										81.3	-38.13										81.32	-38.32										81.34	-38.58										81.36	-38.6										81.38	-38.23										81.4	-37.88										81.42	-38.33										81.44	-38.7										81.46	-37.37										81.48	-38.04										81.5	-38.24										81.52	-38.51										81.54	-38.44										81.56	-38.02										81.58	-37.96										81.6	-37.44										81.62	-37.96										81.64	-37.65										81.66	-37.97										81.68	-37.69										81.7	-37.64										81.72	-37.18										81.74	-38.31										81.76	-38.06										81.78	-37.64										81.8	-36.97										81.82	-36.91										81.84	-37.23										81.86	-37.83										81.88	-37.76										81.9	-38.02										81.92	-38.16										81.94	-38.08										81.96	-38.79										81.98	-37.61										82	-38.24										82.02	-38.44										82.04	-37.9										82.06	-38.57										82.08	-38										82.1	-37.48										82.12	-37.76										82.14	-38.1										82.16	-37.2										82.18	-37.7										82.2	-37.85										82.22	-37.24										82.24	-38.33										82.26	-39.18										82.28	-38.56										82.3	-38.23										82.32	-38.27										82.34	-38.61										82.36	-37.94										82.38	-37.55										82.4	-37.89										82.42	-38.26										82.44	-38.76										82.46	-37.84										82.48	-37.64										82.5	-38.11										82.52	-37.82										82.54	-37.37										82.56	-38.37										82.58	-37.43										82.6	-38.16										82.62	-38.22										82.64	-38.06										82.66	-38.34										82.68	-37.89										82.7	-37.29										82.72	-37.41										82.74	-38.41										82.76	-36.99										82.78	-37.83										82.8	-38.72										82.82	-38.56										82.84	-38.57										82.86	-38.23										82.88	-38.07										82.9	-38.05										82.92	-37.85										82.94	-37.97										82.96	-38.64										82.98	-38.1										83	-37.56										83.02	-37.38										83.04	-37.01										83.06	-36.78										83.08	-37.24										83.1	-37.35										83.12	-36.79										83.14	-36.9										83.16	-37.09										83.18	-37.42										83.2	-38.39										83.22	-37.3										83.24	-38.04										83.26	-37.87										83.28	-37.63										83.3	-37.73										83.32	-38.17										83.34	-37.85										83.36	-36.97										83.38	-38.44										83.4	-37.8										83.42	-38.03										83.44	-38.3										83.46	-37.87										83.48	-37.92										83.5	-37.43										83.52	-37.49										83.54	-36.86										83.56	-37.19										83.58	-36.64										83.6	-37.24										83.62	-37.31										83.64	-37.56										83.66	-36.43										83.68	-37.15										83.7	-36.45										83.72	-37.54										83.74	-37.96										83.76	-37.13										83.78	-37.81										83.8	-37.37										83.82	-38.18										83.84	-38.31										83.86	-37.78										83.88	-38.24										83.9	-37.83										83.92	-37.83										83.94	-37.97										83.96	-37.99										83.98	-36.72										84	-37.53										84.02	-37.21										84.04	-37.25										84.06	-37.08										84.08	-37.53										84.1	-37.54										84.12	-37.31										84.14	-37.19										84.16	-38.39										84.18	-37.66										84.2	-37.83										84.22	-37.05										84.24	-37.99										84.26	-37.93										84.28	-37.91										84.3	-37.97										84.32	-37.84										84.34	-37.97										84.36	-38.54										84.38	-38.1										84.4	-37.84										84.42	-37.25										84.44	-37.13										84.46	-37.02										84.48	-37										84.5	-36.88										84.52	-37.46										84.54	-36.54										84.56	-37.3										84.58	-36.83										84.6	-36.87										84.62	-36.71										84.64	-36.44										84.66	-36.62										84.68	-37.17										84.7	-37.39										84.72	-36.09										84.74	-37.74										84.76	-39.76										84.78	-40.32										84.8	-41.45										84.82	-41.09										84.84	-40.79										84.86	-41.05										84.88	-41.06										84.9	-40.8										84.92	-41.17										84.94	-40.45										84.96	-39.2										84.98	-39.14										85	-37.59										85.02	-37.73										85.04	-39.84										85.06	-40.89										85.08	-40.67										85.1	-40.11										85.12	-40.41										85.14	-39.44										85.16	-39.84										85.18	-39.98										85.2	-41.28										85.22	-41.21										85.24	-41.27										85.26	-40.68										85.28	-40.79										85.3	-41.17										85.32	-39.62										85.34	-39.66										85.36	-40.96										85.38	-39.68										85.4	-40.82										85.42	-40.39										85.44	-40.95										85.46	-41.26										85.48	-41.91										85.5	-41.39										85.52	-40.47										85.54	-40.43										85.56	-40.47										85.58	-41.22										85.6	-42.86										85.62	-41.1										85.64	-41.16										85.66	-41.44										85.68	-41.2										85.7	-41.21										85.72	-41.72										85.74	-41.13										85.76	-41.86										85.78	-41.9										85.8	-40.45										85.82	-41.09										85.84	-41.04										85.86	-41.89										85.88	-41.27										85.9	-41.29										85.92	-40.28										85.94	-42.34										85.96	-41.89										85.98	-40.96										86	-40.86										86.02	-40.71										86.04	-40.86										86.06	-40.41										86.08	-40.33										86.1	-40.38										86.12	-40.6										86.14	-39.22										86.16	-40.73										86.18	-41.31										86.2	-41.47										86.22	-40.84										86.24	-41.12										86.26	-41.23										86.28	-41.33										86.3	-41.34										86.32	-41.08										86.34	-41.04										86.36	-41.57										86.38	-42.08										86.4	-41.07										86.42	-42.08										86.44	-40.71										86.46	-41.43										86.48	-40.61										86.5	-40.49										86.52	-40.73										86.54	-41.09										86.56	-41.18										86.58	-41.09										86.6	-41.29										86.62	-41.49										86.64	-41.39										86.66	-41.96										86.68	-40.82										86.7	-42.08										86.72	-42.02										86.74	-40.97										86.76	-42.74										86.78	-41.87										86.8	-40.77										86.82	-41.01										86.84	-41.77										86.86	-41.45										86.88	-40.76										86.9	-41.34										86.92	-41.32										86.94	-40.2										86.96	-40.83										86.98	-41.73										87	-41.06										87.02	-41.13										87.04	-41.24										87.06	-40.97										87.08	-42.4										87.1	-42.07										87.12	-42.36										87.14	-41.59										87.16	-41.44										87.18	-41.95										87.2	-42.5										87.22	-41.26										87.24	-41.76										87.26	-41.36										87.28	-41.09										87.3	-41.61										87.32	-41.74										87.34	-41.19										87.36	-41.37										87.38	-41.13										87.4	-41.95										87.42	-41.56										87.44	-41.75										87.46	-40.8										87.48	-41.68										87.5	-41.91										87.52	-42.17										87.54	-40.92										87.56	-42.01										87.58	-41.26										87.6	-41.26										87.62	-41.09										87.64	-41										87.66	-40.11										87.68	-40.49										87.7	-40.13										87.72	-39.53										87.74	-38.91										87.76	-39.02										87.78	-39.18										87.8	-39.8										87.82	-40										87.84	-39.77										87.86	-40.26										87.88	-40.77										87.9	-40.41										87.92	-39.94										87.94	-39.53										87.96	-40.36										87.98	-40.07										88	-39.45										88.02	-39.37										88.04	-39.73										88.06	-39.11										88.08	-38.89										88.1	-38.96										88.12	-38.88										88.14	-38.5										88.16	-39.24										88.18	-39.93										88.2	-39.93										88.22	-39.46										88.24	-40.3										88.26	-37.91										88.28	-39.21										88.3	-39.08										88.32	-38.3										88.34	-38.72										88.36	-37.98										88.38	-38.37										88.4	-39.02										88.42	-39.06										88.44	-38.67										88.46	-39.31										88.48	-38.85										88.5	-39.03										88.52	-38.63										88.54	-38.85										88.56	-38.86										88.58	-38.46										88.6	-38.14										88.62	-38.34										88.64	-38.29										88.66	-38.17										88.68	-38.59										88.7	-38.64										88.72	-39.29										88.74	-38.76										88.76	-38.94										88.78	-38.95										88.8	-39.32										88.82	-39.05										88.84	-39.36										88.86	-40.53										88.88	-39.93										88.9	-38.71										88.92	-39.62										88.94	-39.16										88.96	-38.34										88.98	-38.25										89	-38.63										89.02	-38.28										89.04	-37.89										89.06	-38.03										89.08	-38.36										89.1	-38.47										89.12	-38.8										89.14	-38.43										89.16	-38.24										89.18	-37.95										89.2	-38.4										89.22	-37.79										89.24	-38.17										89.26	-38.67										89.28	-38.99										89.3	-38.55										89.32	-38.04										89.34	-38.13										89.36	-37.57										89.38	-37.78										89.4	-37.74										89.42	-37.94										89.44	-37.75										89.46	-38.12										89.48	-38.02										89.5	-38.4										89.52	-37.26										89.54	-38.07										89.56	-38.4										89.58	-37.92										89.6	-37.7										89.62	-37.66										89.64	-37.51										89.66	-37.36										89.68	-38.01										89.7	-38.12										89.72	-38.02										89.74	-38.16										89.76	-37.2										89.78	-38.79										89.8	-39.46										89.82	-39.17										89.84	-38.4										89.86	-38.67										89.88	-38.06										89.9	-38.31										89.92	-37.85										89.94	-38.26										89.96	-37.63										89.98	-37.83										90	-38.26										90.02	-38.14										90.04	-39.15										90.06	-39.98										90.08	-39.88										90.1	-40.21										90.12	-40.84										90.14	-39.72										90.16	-39.75										90.18	-39.89										90.2	-39.22										90.22	-40.09										90.24	-39.49										90.26	-40.09										90.28	-39.64										90.3	-39.65										90.32	-39.64										90.34	-40.22										90.36	-39.84										90.38	-40										90.4	-39.25										90.42	-39.49										90.44	-39.53										90.46	-39.81										90.48	-39.07										90.5	-39.28										90.52	-39.3										90.54	-39.2										90.56	-39.67										90.58	-39.89										90.6	-40.01										90.62	-38.95										90.64	-39.88										90.66	-39.07										90.68	-39.99										90.7	-39.35										90.72	-39.31										90.74	-40.04										90.76	-39.52										90.78	-39.62										90.8	-39.77										90.82	-39.66										90.84	-39.34										90.86	-39.33										90.88	-40.07										90.9	-39.88										90.92	-39.04										90.94	-39.53										90.96	-39.15										90.98	-38.78										91	-39.62										91.02	-39.59										91.04	-39.3										91.06	-39.7										91.08	-39.42										91.1	-39.43										91.12	-39.32										91.14	-39.54										91.16	-39.57										91.18	-39.68										91.2	-38.98										91.22	-39.39										91.24	-38.76										91.26	-39.39										91.28	-39.87										91.3	-40.4										91.32	-39.01										91.34	-39.41										91.36	-39.53										91.38	-39.63										91.4	-39.97										91.42	-40										91.44	-39.78										91.46	-39.7										91.48	-39.72										91.5	-39.46										91.52	-40.63										91.54	-39.5										91.56	-39.43										91.58	-40.14										91.6	-39.78										91.62	-40.27										91.64	-39.87										91.66	-39.89										91.68	-39.74										91.7	-40.12										91.72	-39.5										91.74	-39.24										91.76	-39.46										91.78	-39.31										91.8	-38.42										91.82	-39.05										91.84	-39.01										91.86	-39.6										91.88	-39.25										91.9	-40.08										91.92	-39.81										91.94	-39.26										91.96	-40.12										91.98	-39.77										92	-39.7										92.02	-39.55										92.04	-39.63										92.06	-39.36										92.08	-39.76										92.1	-39.35										92.12	-40.05										92.14	-39.52										92.16	-39.21										92.18	-39.43										92.2	-40.12										92.22	-40.81										92.24	-39.78										92.26	-39.63										92.28	-40.6										92.3	-39.67										92.32	-38.98										92.34	-38.82										92.36	-39.32										92.38	-39.86										92.4	-39.58										92.42	-39.53										92.44	-40.7										92.46	-38.82										92.48	-38.57										92.5	-39.45										92.52	-40.13										92.54	-39.2										92.56	-39.89										92.58	-39.51										92.6	-39.38										92.62	-40.14										92.64	-40.24										92.66	-39.48										92.68	-39.55										92.7	-39.58										92.72	-39.19										92.74	-39.63										92.76	-39.94										92.78	-39.2										92.8	-40.06										92.82	-39.55										92.84	-39.99										92.86	-40.47										92.88	-40.69										92.9	-40.13										92.92	-40.58										92.94	-39.92										92.96	-39.18										92.98	-40.02										93	-39.8										93.02	-39.97										93.04	-39.98										93.06	-40.08										93.08	-39.93										93.1	-39.74										93.12	-40.51										93.14	-39.71										93.16	-39.41										93.18	-39.44										93.2	-40.72										93.22	-40.18										93.24	-39										93.26	-39.2										93.28	-39.57										93.3	-38.71										93.32	-39.63										93.34	-40.14										93.36	-39.33										93.38	-40.32										93.4	-40.03										93.42	-39.47										93.44	-40.37										93.46	-39.35										93.48	-39.59										93.5	-39.55										93.52	-39.28										93.54	-39.72										93.56	-40										93.58	-39.83										93.6	-39.03										93.62	-38.58										93.64	-39.45										93.66	-39.58										93.68	-40.24										93.7	-39.01										93.72	-39.76										93.74	-40.56										93.76	-40.11										93.78	-39.79										93.8	-39.39										93.82	-38.95										93.84	-40.06										93.86	-39.69										93.88	-40.06										93.9	-39.15										93.92	-39.44										93.94	-39.34										93.96	-39.04										93.98	-38.77										94	-39.06										94.02	-39.5										94.04	-39.24										94.06	-39.84										94.08	-38.94										94.1	-40										94.12	-38.77										94.14	-39										94.16	-39.13										94.18	-38.26										94.2	-39.77										94.22	-39.05										94.24	-39.08										94.26	-39.07										94.28	-39.55										94.3	-40.24										94.32	-39.53										94.34	-39.88										94.36	-39.62										94.38	-39.08										94.4	-39.42										94.42	-39.71										94.44	-39.63										94.46	-39.63										94.48	-39.4										94.5	-39.18										94.52	-39.36										94.54	-39.71										94.56	-39.5										94.58	-39.61										94.6	-40.13										94.62	-40.13										94.64	-39.77										94.66	-39.59										94.68	-39.72										94.7	-39.37										94.72	-39.55										94.74	-39.58										94.76	-38.62										94.78	-39.07										94.8	-39.52										94.82	-38.78										94.84	-39.08										94.86	-40.41										94.88	-39.53										94.9	-38.46										94.92	-39.36										94.94	-39.46										94.96	-38.7										94.98	-39.41										95	-39.58										95.02	-39.19										95.04	-39.42										95.06	-39.04										95.08	-39.2										95.1	-38.84										95.12	-38.78										95.14	-37.57										95.16	-39.51										95.18	-39.01										95.2	-39.83										95.22	-39.54										95.24	-38.39										95.26	-39.22										95.28	-39.64										95.3	-39.2										95.32	-38.17										95.34	-39.13										95.36	-38.88										95.38	-38.06										95.4	-39.42										95.42	-38.83										95.44	-39.57										95.46	-38.76										95.48	-39.51										95.5	-39.12										95.52	-39.27										95.54	-39.07										95.56	-38.74										95.58	-39.73										95.6	-39.11										95.62	-37.98										95.64	-39										95.66	-38.47										95.68	-38.81										95.7	-38.85										95.72	-38.98										95.74	-38.64										95.76	-38.6										95.78	-38.59										95.8	-38.38										95.82	-38.81										95.84	-39										95.86	-38.68										95.88	-38.16										95.9	-38.62										95.92	-39.06										95.94	-39.26										95.96	-38.65										95.98	-39.11										96	-38.83										96.02	-38.92										96.04	-38.3										96.06	-38.68										96.08	-38.29										96.1	-38.34										96.12	-38.27										96.14	-38.89										96.16	-39.01										96.18	-39.04										96.2	-39.06										96.22	-38.36										96.24	-37.93										96.26	-38.67										96.28	-38.27										96.3	-38.79										96.32	-38.61										96.34	-38.4										96.36	-37.78										96.38	-38.11										96.4	-38.77										96.42	-37.71										96.44	-38.28										96.46	-38.31										96.48	-38.14										96.5	-37.95										96.52	-38.2										96.54	-38.7										96.56	-38.7										96.58	-39.12										96.6	-39.08										96.62	-39.25										96.64	-38.77										96.66	-39.56										96.68	-39.24										96.7	-39.22										96.72	-39.28										96.74	-38.85										96.76	-38.26										96.78	-37.39										96.8	-38.4										96.82	-38.42										96.84	-39.09										96.86	-38.57										96.88	-38.25										96.9	-39.27										96.92	-39.07										96.94	-38.67										96.96	-38.61										96.98	-38										97	-39.41										97.02	-39.06										97.04	-38.6										97.06	-38.66										97.08	-38.05										97.1	-39.06										97.12	-39.16										97.14	-38.02										97.16	-38.56										97.18	-38.4										97.2	-38.51										97.22	-38.69										97.24	-38.28										97.26	-38.31										97.28	-38.5										97.3	-37.58										97.32	-38.71										97.34	-38.89										97.36	-38.2										97.38	-38.19										97.4	-38.75										97.42	-37.64										97.44	-37.75										97.46	-38.21										97.48	-37.96										97.5	-37.3										97.52	-37.64										97.54	-38.9										97.56	-39.32										97.58	-39.17										97.6	-38.81										97.62	-38.62										97.64	-38.52										97.66	-37.8										97.68	-38.54										97.7	-38.62										97.72	-38.06										97.74	-38.82										97.76	-38.56										97.78	-38.95										97.8	-38.3										97.82	-38.59										97.84	-38.33										97.86	-38.82										97.88	-38.55										97.9	-38.26										97.92	-38.58										97.94	-38.38										97.96	-38.19										97.98	-39.46										98	-38.23										98.02	-38.02										98.04	-38.25										98.06	-38.31										98.08	-38.42										98.1	-38.68										98.12	-37.92										98.14	-38.94										98.16	-38.22										98.18	-38.83										98.2	-38.67										98.22	-37.47										98.24	-38.68										98.26	-38.81										98.28	-38.88										98.3	-38.52										98.32	-38.24										98.34	-38.45										98.36	-38.16										98.38	-38.86										98.4	-38.61										98.42	-38.2										98.44	-37.9										98.46	-38.75										98.48	-38.01										98.5	-37.17										98.52	-37.93										98.54	-38.54										98.56	-38.05										98.58	-38.18										98.6	-37.54										98.62	-38.42										98.64	-38										98.66	-38.41										98.68	-38.21										98.7	-37.52										98.72	-38.13										98.74	-37.61										98.76	-38.2										98.78	-37										98.8	-37.4										98.82	-37										98.84	-37.81										98.86	-37.74										98.88	-38.12										98.9	-38.21										98.92	-38.27										98.94	-37.99										98.96	-37.73										98.98	-37.71										99	-38.62										99.02	-38.42										99.04	-39.08										99.06	-38.54										99.08	-38.33										99.1	-37.73										99.12	-37.46										99.14	-38.46										99.16	-38.59										99.18	-38.23										99.2	-38.02										99.22	-38.13										99.24	-38.33										99.26	-37.88										99.28	-38.54										99.3	-38.24										99.32	-37.94										99.34	-37.88										99.36	-38.02										99.38	-37.01										99.4	-37.72										99.42	-38.29										99.44	-38.22										99.46	-37.48										99.48	-37.71										99.5	-38.39										99.52	-38.13										99.54	-38.26										99.56	-38.38										99.58	-37.52										99.6	-37.7										99.62	-37.45										99.64	-37.71										99.66	-37.81										99.68	-38.36										99.7	-37.67										99.72	-37.88										99.74	-37.52										99.76	-36.79										99.78	-37.99										99.8	-37.61										99.82	-38.25										99.84	-37.78										99.86	-37.51										99.88	-37.36										99.9	-37.68										99.92	-37.35										99.94	-37.96										99.96	-37.37										99.98	-37.68										100	-37.44										100.02	-37.65										100.04	-37.64										100.06	-37.43										100.08	-37.18										100.1	-37.59										100.12	-37.3										100.14	-38.06										100.16	-37.98										100.18	-37.57										100.2	-38.36										100.22	-37.96										100.24	-37.74										100.26	-37.77										100.28	-37.67										100.3	-37.67										100.32	-37.95										100.34	-37.35										100.36	-37.83										100.38	-38.41										100.4	-37.95										100.42	-37.37										100.44	-38.25										100.46	-37.9										100.48	-38.06										100.5	-38.2										100.52	-37.59										100.54	-37.71										100.56	-38.43										100.58	-37.6										100.6	-37.33										100.62	-37.77										100.64	-37.67										100.66	-38.67										100.68	-37.95										100.7	-37.83										100.72	-37.91										100.74	-37.53										100.76	-37.23										100.78	-37.67										100.8	-38.6										100.82	-38.12										100.84	-38.22										100.86	-37.51										100.88	-37.53										100.9	-37.31										100.92	-37.74										100.94	-37.85										100.96	-37.84										100.98	-37.37										101	-37.28										101.02	-37.95										101.04	-38.02										101.06	-37.58										101.08	-37.47										101.1	-37.01										101.12	-37.6										101.14	-37.19										101.16	-37.75										101.18	-37.73										101.2	-36.79										101.22	-37.09										101.24	-36.84										101.26	-36.98										101.28	-37.6										101.3	-38.62										101.32	-37.75										101.34	-37.58										101.36	-37.68										101.38	-37.39										101.4	-37.64										101.42	-37.19										101.44	-37.6										101.46	-37.28										101.48	-37.6										101.5	-37.41										101.52	-37.35										101.54	-37.53										101.56	-37.75										101.58	-37.3										101.6	-37.6										101.62	-37.89										101.64	-37.07										101.66	-37.33										101.68	-37.5										101.7	-37.12										101.72	-37.24										101.74	-37.4										101.76	-37.59										101.78	-37.9										101.8	-37.32										101.82	-37.03										101.84	-36.33										101.86	-37.65										101.88	-37.17										101.9	-36.5										101.92	-37.37										101.94	-37.89										101.96	-37.52										101.98	-36.87										102	-36.77										102.02	-37.17										102.04	-37.26										102.06	-37.12										102.08	-36.72										102.1	-37.27										102.12	-37.07										102.14	-36.64										102.16	-37.18										102.18	-36.92										102.2	-37.78										102.22	-37.3										102.24	-36.64										102.26	-36.97										102.28	-36.27										102.3	-37.77										102.32	-37.23										102.34	-36.94										102.36	-36.74										102.38	-37.14										102.4	-36.97										102.42	-37.32										102.44	-37.1										102.46	-36.35										102.48	-36.59										102.5	-37.49										102.52	-37.19										102.54	-36.95										102.56	-36.88										102.58	-37.13										102.6	-36.74										102.62	-36.78										102.64	-37.31										102.66	-37.25										102.68	-37.17										102.7	-37.79										102.72	-37.71										102.74	-36.34										102.76	-36.55										102.78	-36.65										102.8	-37.4										102.82	-36.73										102.84	-36.76										102.86	-36.88										102.88	-35.8										102.9	-36.64										102.92	-36.06										102.94	-36.68										102.96	-36.71										102.98	-36.4										103	-37.74										103.02	-37.25										103.04	-37.46										103.06	-36.53										103.08	-36.47										103.1	-37.2										103.12	-36.83										103.14	-36.63										103.16	-36.71										103.18	-36.86										103.2	-36.44										103.22	-37.24										103.24	-36.98										103.26	-36.79										103.28	-36.67										103.3	-36.38										103.32	-37.01										103.34	-36.95										103.36	-36.87										103.38	-36.56										103.4	-37										103.42	-37.15										103.44	-36.88										103.46	-37.22										103.48	-36.65										103.5	-36.79										103.52	-37.04										103.54	-37.08										103.56	-37.02										103.58	-36.67										103.6	-36.62										103.62	-36.54										103.64	-36.95										103.66	-36.86										103.68	-37.28										103.7	-36.35										103.72	-36.74										103.74	-35.99										103.76	-36.65										103.78	-36.89										103.8	-37.39										103.82	-36.41										103.84	-36.15										103.86	-36.92										103.88	-36.74										103.9	-37.17										103.92	-36.97										103.94	-36.85										103.96	-37.07										103.98	-36.34										104	-37.05										104.02	-37.76										104.04	-38.77										104.06	-38.69										104.08	-39.37										104.1	-39.86										104.12	-39.47										104.14	-39.23										104.16	-39.08										104.18	-39.83										104.2	-39.4										104.22	-39.75										104.24	-39.28										104.26	-38.87										104.28	-38.94										104.3	-39.67										104.32	-39.84										104.34	-38.87										104.36	-38.92										104.38	-36.93										104.4	-36.23										104.42	-35.9										104.44	-35.54										104.46	-37.43										104.48	-37.66										104.5	-38.19										104.52	-38.97										104.54	-39.37										104.56	-39.91										104.58	-39.54										104.6	-39.13										104.62	-39.67										104.64	-39.49										104.66	-39.9										104.68	-39.92										104.7	-40										104.72	-39.81										104.74	-39.58										104.76	-39.93										104.78	-40.06										104.8	-39.48										104.82	-40.15										104.84	-40.4										104.86	-39.58										104.88	-39.96										104.9	-39.92										104.92	-39.51										104.94	-40.04										104.96	-39.53										104.98	-39.22										105	-39.7										105.02	-39.75										105.04	-39.6										105.06	-39.26										105.08	-39.79										105.1	-40.51										105.12	-40.39										105.14	-39.85										105.16	-39.51										105.18	-40.01										105.2	-39.06										105.22	-38.75										105.24	-39.51										105.26	-39.87										105.28	-40.21										105.3	-39.62										105.32	-39.25										105.34	-39.52										105.36	-39.53										105.38	-40.17										105.4	-39.9										105.42	-39.9										105.44	-38.59										105.46	-38.23										105.48	-38.31										105.5	-38.04										105.52	-38.38										105.54	-37.37										105.56	-37.67										105.58	-38.2										105.6	-37.62										105.62	-37.59										105.64	-37.61										105.66	-37.47										105.68	-37.72										105.7	-37.12										105.72	-37.2										105.74	-37.59										105.76	-37.59										105.78	-37.83										105.8	-37.58										105.82	-37.44										105.84	-37.32										105.86	-37.31										105.88	-36.44										105.9	-37.03										105.92	-37.1										105.94	-37.26										105.96	-36.88										105.98	-37.87										106	-37.27										106.02	-37.56										106.04	-37.53										106.06	-37.65										106.08	-37.48										106.1	-37.48										106.12	-37.31										106.14	-37.25										106.16	-37.09										106.18	-37.19										106.2	-37.68										106.22	-38.42										106.24	-38.62										106.26	-39.06										106.28	-38.85										106.3	-37.84										106.32	-36.78										106.34	-36.97										106.36	-36.98										106.38	-37.14										106.4	-37.16										106.42	-37.66										106.44	-36.96										106.46	-36.81										106.48	-37.75										106.5	-37.18										106.52	-37.22										106.54	-37.14										106.56	-37										106.58	-37.64										106.6	-37.03										106.62	-36.76										106.64	-36.62										106.66	-36.32										106.68	-36.35										106.7	-36.44										106.72	-37.03										106.74	-37.39										106.76	-39										106.78	-40.16										106.8	-40.39										106.82	-39.94										106.84	-39.39										106.86	-39.17										106.88	-38.5										106.9	-37.37										106.92	-37.47										106.94	-37.07										106.96	-37.15										106.98	-37.76										107	-37.53										107.02	-37.43										107.04	-37.36										107.06	-37.65										107.08	-37.61										107.1	-37.72										107.12	-37.77										107.14	-37.32										107.16	-37.12										107.18	-36.82										107.2	-37.08										107.22	-37.32										107.24	-37.5										107.26	-37.65										107.28	-37.39										107.3	-37.48										107.32	-37.51										107.34	-37.95										107.36	-37.87										107.38	-37.55										107.4	-37.91										107.42	-37.09										107.44	-36.95										107.46	-37.89										107.48	-38.12										107.5	-37.58										107.52	-37.57										107.54	-37.48										107.56	-37.5										107.58	-37.36										107.6	-37.05										107.62	-37.35										107.64	-37.95										107.66	-37.92										107.68	-37.66										107.7	-37.22										107.72	-37.02										107.74	-37.26										107.76	-36.99										107.78	-37.01										107.8	-37.21										107.82	-37.24										107.84	-37.48										107.86	-37.08										107.88	-37.45										107.9	-37.39										107.92	-37.54										107.94	-37.06										107.96	-36.65										107.98	-36.79										108	-36.71										108.02	-36.88										108.04	-36.73										108.06	-36.42										108.08	-37										108.1	-36.58										108.12	-36.27										108.14	-36.41										108.16	-36.49										108.18	-36.17										108.2	-36.67										108.22	-37.36										108.24	-37.32										108.26	-37										108.28	-39.21										108.3	-40.26										108.32	-40.92										108.34	-40.49										108.36	-40.24										108.38	-40.6										108.4	-40.9										108.42	-41.57										108.44	-41.98										108.46	-40.97										108.48	-40.55										108.5	-40.32										108.52	-40.54										108.54	-40.41										108.56	-40.78										108.58	-41.14										108.6	-40.62										108.62	-41.29										108.64	-40.97										108.66	-41.24										108.68	-41.12										108.7	-41.35										108.72	-40.8										108.74	-40.81										108.76	-40.49										108.78	-40.43										108.8	-40.8										108.82	-40.06										108.84	-40.57										108.86	-40.47										108.88	-40.92										108.9	-41.7										108.92	-41.67										108.94	-40.57										108.96	-41.07										108.98	-41.7										109	-41.66										109.02	-41.28										109.04	-41.32										109.06	-40.75										109.08	-41.07										109.1	-40.78										109.12	-40.9										109.14	-40.71										109.16	-40.58										109.18	-40.81										109.2	-41										109.22	-41.08										109.24	-40.44										109.26	-40.72										109.28	-40.37										109.3	-41.47										109.32	-41.86										109.34	-41.45										109.36	-42.2										109.38	-41.68										109.4	-41.45										109.42	-41.59										109.44	-41.05										109.46	-41.31										109.48	-41.57										109.5	-41.64										109.52	-41.75										109.54	-41.33										109.56	-41.18										109.58	-41.26										109.6	-41.08										109.62	-41.33										109.64	-41.59										109.66	-41.18										109.68	-41										109.7	-41.33										109.72	-41.27										109.74	-41.34										109.76	-41.59										109.78	-41.12										109.8	-40.58										109.82	-40.93										109.84	-40.61										109.86	-41.03										109.88	-41.36										109.9	-41.63										109.92	-41.06										109.94	-41.23										109.96	-40.87										109.98	-40.86										110	-41.7										110.02	-41.71										110.04	-41.58										110.06	-41.14										110.08	-41.77										110.1	-41.62										110.12	-41.53										110.14	-42.49										110.16	-42.09										110.18	-41.71										110.2	-41.26										110.22	-41.82										110.24	-41.32										110.26	-41.19										110.28	-41.71										110.3	-41.58										110.32	-41.32										110.34	-41.56										110.36	-41.56										110.38	-41.57										110.4	-41.6										110.42	-41.54										110.44	-41.18										110.46	-40.51										110.48	-40.48										110.5	-41.23										110.52	-41.29										110.54	-41.68										110.56	-41.5										110.58	-40.94										110.6	-40.16										110.62	-40.12										110.64	-39.39										110.66	-39.78										110.68	-39.02										110.7	-38.27										110.72	-38.1										110.74	-38.23										110.76	-38.07										110.78	-38.79										110.8	-38.03										110.82	-38.38										110.84	-38.35										110.86	-37.84										110.88	-38.29										110.9	-38.48										110.92	-38.69										110.94	-39.61										110.96	-39.86										110.98	-39.7										111	-39.47										111.02	-39.72										111.04	-39.6										111.06	-40.08										111.08	-39.58										111.1	-40.04										111.12	-40.15										111.14	-39.52										111.16	-39										111.18	-39.59										111.2	-40.19										111.22	-39.71										111.24	-39.8										111.26	-39.77										111.28	-40.1										111.3	-39.81										111.32	-39.55										111.34	-38.76										111.36	-39.52										111.38	-39.27										111.4	-39.19										111.42	-39.11										111.44	-38.56										111.46	-38.56										111.48	-38.84										111.5	-38.94										111.52	-38.2										111.54	-38.33										111.56	-38.38										111.58	-39.32										111.6	-38.56										111.62	-38.58										111.64	-38.87										111.66	-39.1										111.68	-39.18										111.7	-38.32										111.72	-38.94										111.74	-39.07										111.76	-39.36										111.78	-38.76										111.8	-39.3										111.82	-39.34										111.84	-38.51										111.86	-38.6										111.88	-38.88										111.9	-38.77										111.92	-38.47										111.94	-37.92										111.96	-37.1										111.98	-37.18										112	-37.83										112.02	-38.14										112.04	-38.16										112.06	-38.63										112.08	-38.22										112.1	-37.99										112.12	-37.85										112.14	-37.44										112.16	-37.76										112.18	-38.19										112.2	-38.16										112.22	-37.55										112.24	-38.33										112.26	-37.86										112.28	-37.32										112.3	-38.12										112.32	-38.51										112.34	-37.93										112.36	-37.76										112.38	-37.7										112.4	-37.82										112.42	-37.61										112.44	-37.73										112.46	-37.35										112.48	-36.99										112.5	-37.81										112.52	-37.69										112.54	-37.14										112.56	-36.71										112.58	-37.41										112.6	-37.62										112.62	-37.44										112.64	-37.41										112.66	-37.08										112.68	-37.42										112.7	-37.6										112.72	-37.4										112.74	-36.82										112.76	-37.29										112.78	-37.32										112.8	-37.25										112.82	-37.05										112.84	-37.75										112.86	-37.48										112.88	-37.38										112.9	-37.4										112.92	-37.58										112.94	-37.59										112.96	-38.11										112.98	-38.03										113	-37.05										113.02	-36.69										113.04	-36.65										113.06	-37.17										113.08	-37.22										113.1	-36.8										113.12	-36.95										113.14	-37.23										113.16	-37.25										113.18	-37.15										113.2	-37.33										113.22	-37.12										113.24	-37.64										113.26	-37.46										113.28	-37.01										113.3	-36.89										113.32	-37.16										113.34	-37.02										113.36	-37.95										113.38	-37.71										113.4	-37.68										113.42	-37.86										113.44	-37.95										113.46	-38										113.48	-37.02										113.5	-37.71										113.52	-37.53										113.54	-37.86										113.56	-37.01										113.58	-37.31										113.6	-37.34										113.62	-37.85										113.64	-36.91										113.66	-36.88										113.68	-37.13										113.7	-36.99										113.72	-37.12										113.74	-37.61										113.76	-37.24										113.78	-36.78										113.8	-37.25										113.82	-37.07										113.84	-37.4										113.86	-37.54										113.88	-37.46										113.9	-37.26										113.92	-36.81										113.94	-36.42										113.96	-37.22										113.98	-37.28										114	-37.59										114.02	-37.76										114.04	-37.46										114.06	-37.49										114.08	-36.91										114.1	-37.48										114.12	-37.26										114.14	-36.84										114.16	-36.57										114.18	-37.21										114.2	-37.8										114.22	-37.64										114.24	-37.17										114.26	-36.72										114.28	-37.48										114.3	-37.75										114.32	-36.88										114.34	-36.69										114.36	-36.95										114.38	-37.34										114.4	-37.78										114.42	-37.54										114.44	-36.68										114.46	-36.81										114.48	-37.26										114.5	-37.41										114.52	-37.16										114.54	-37.09										114.56	-37.46										114.58	-37.39										114.6	-37.25										114.62	-37.08										114.64	-37.18										114.66	-36.56										114.68	-37.12										114.7	-37.14										114.72	-37.18										114.74	-37.15										114.76	-37.43										114.78	-37.22										114.8	-37.12										114.82	-36.94										114.84	-36.42										114.86	-36.54										114.88	-37.7										114.9	-37.37										114.92	-37.29										114.94	-37.53										114.96	-37.46										114.98	-37.78										115	-36.84										115.02	-37.1										115.04	-36.81										115.06	-37.26										115.08	-37.18										115.1	-36.77										115.12	-37.39										115.14	-37.26										115.16	-36.86										115.18	-37.12										115.2	-37.11										115.22	-36.82										115.24	-37.02										115.26	-36.7										115.28	-36.34										115.3	-36.89										115.32	-37.32										115.34	-37.37										115.36	-36.89										115.38	-37.9										115.4	-38.39										115.42	-37.88										115.44	-38.6										115.46	-38.44										115.48	-39.14										115.5	-38.88										115.52	-38.3										115.54	-38.69										115.56	-38.51										115.58	-38.51										115.6	-38.28										115.62	-37.49										115.64	-38.24										115.66	-38.89										115.68	-38.82										115.7	-38.13										115.72	-38.69										115.74	-38.38										115.76	-38.34										115.78	-39.29										115.8	-38.61										115.82	-38.44										115.84	-38.1										115.86	-38.23										115.88	-38.4										115.9	-38.46										115.92	-38.42										115.94	-38.52										115.96	-38.95										115.98	-38.85										116	-38.42										116.02	-38.34										116.04	-38.7										116.06	-38.62										116.08	-38.71										116.1	-38.63										116.12	-38.6										116.14	-38.55										116.16	-38.53										116.18	-38.5										116.2	-38.08										116.22	-37.7										116.24	-37.9										116.26	-38.19										116.28	-38.43										116.3	-38.88										116.32	-38.4										116.34	-38.3										116.36	-38.13										116.38	-38.21										116.4	-38.24										116.42	-38.44										116.44	-38.79										116.46	-38.52										116.48	-37.99										116.5	-37.32										116.52	-37.99										116.54	-37.85										116.56	-38.21										116.58	-38.76										116.6	-38.34										116.62	-38.53										116.64	-37.96										116.66	-37.79										116.68	-38.14										116.7	-37.66										116.72	-37.98										116.74	-38.39										116.76	-38.06										116.78	-38.61										116.8	-38.63										116.82	-38.61										116.84	-38.12										116.86	-38.05										116.88	-38.6										116.9	-38.16										116.92	-37.74										116.94	-38.19										116.96	-38.3										116.98	-38.34										117	-37.85										117.02	-37.8										117.04	-37.87										117.06	-38.34										117.08	-38.13										117.1	-37.86										117.12	-37.87										117.14	-37.95										117.16	-38.31										117.18	-37.78										117.2	-37.81										117.22	-37.82										117.24	-38.35										117.26	-38										117.28	-38.14										117.3	-38.47										117.32	-38.29										117.34	-38.15										117.36	-38.24										117.38	-38.09										117.4	-38.06										117.42	-37.59										117.44	-37.79										117.46	-38.05										117.48	-37.65										117.5	-37.22										117.52	-37.24										117.54	-37.78										117.56	-37.71										117.58	-37.66										117.6	-37.89										117.62	-37.82										117.64	-37.72										117.66	-37.7										117.68	-37.54										117.7	-37.57										117.72	-37.68										117.74	-37.92										117.76	-37.12										117.78	-36.83										117.8	-37.13										117.82	-37.57										117.84	-37.41										117.86	-37.47										117.88	-37.51										117.9	-37.49										117.92	-38.05										117.94	-37.49										117.96	-37.51										117.98	-37.66										118	-37.81										118.02	-37.85										118.04	-37.7										118.06	-37.75										118.08	-38.17										118.1	-37.69										118.12	-37.75										118.14	-37.98										118.16	-37.73										118.18	-37.42										118.2	-37.77										118.22	-37.96										118.24	-37.6										118.26	-37.55										118.28	-37.66										118.3	-37.73										118.32	-36.81										118.34	-36.62										118.36	-37.1										118.38	-37.24										118.4	-37.31										118.42	-37.23										118.44	-37.25										118.46	-36.97										118.48	-37.45										118.5	-37.6										118.52	-37.48										118.54	-37.39										118.56	-37.29										118.58	-36.95										118.6	-37.15										118.62	-36.96										118.64	-37.19										118.66	-37.73										118.68	-37.61										118.7	-37.46										118.72	-37.49										118.74	-36.92										118.76	-36.72										118.78	-36.65										118.8	-36.55										118.82	-36.88										118.84	-36.99										118.86	-36.96										118.88	-37.03										118.9	-37.04										118.92	-36.97										118.94	-37.01										118.96	-37.13										118.98	-36.73										119	-36.54										119.02	-35.98										119.04	-36.44										119.06	-36.67										119.08	-37.03										119.1	-36.69										119.12	-36.71										119.14	-35.71										119.16	-35.61										119.18	-35.66										119.2	-35.88										119.22	-35.95										119.24	-35.68										119.26	-35.6										119.28	-35.49										119.3	-35.66										119.32	-35.8										119.34	-35.55										119.36	-35.6										119.38	-35.48										119.4	-35.24										119.42	-35.45										119.44	-35.58										119.46	-35.4										119.48	-35.31										119.5	-35.06										119.52	-34.8										119.54	-34.41										119.56	-34.73										119.58	-34.91										119.6	-34.85										119.62	-35.16										119.64	-35.17										119.66	-34.74										119.68	-34.77										119.7	-34.84										119.72	-34.64										119.74	-34.81										119.76	-34.92										119.78	-34.83										119.8	-34.57										119.82	-34.45										119.84	-34.41										119.86	-34.65										119.88	-34.47										119.9	-34.16										119.92	-34.14										119.94	-34.54										119.96	-34.75										119.98	-34.54										120	-34.52										120.02	-34.49										120.04	-34.35										120.06	-34.2										120.08	-34.18										120.1	-34.49										120.12	-34.54										120.14	-34.25										120.16	-34.22										120.18	-34.19										120.2	-34.16										120.22	-34.24										120.24	-34.14										120.26	-34.2										120.28	-33.88										120.3	-34.01										120.32	-34.02										120.34	-33.9										120.36	-33.92										120.38	-33.69										120.4	-33.55										120.42	-33.5										120.44	-33.54										120.46	-33.71										120.48	-33.82										120.5	-33.76										120.52	-33.49										120.54	-33.28										120.56	-33.31										120.58	-33.51										120.6	-33.38										120.62	-33.12										120.64	-33.4										120.66	-33.39										120.68	-33.29										120.7	-33.19										120.72	-33.2										120.74	-33.16										120.76	-32.6										120.78	-32.7										120.8	-33.05										120.82	-32.99										120.84	-32.52										120.86	-32.4										120.88	-32.84										120.9	-32.77										120.92	-32.71										120.94	-32.55										120.96	-32.59										120.98	-32.68										121	-32.74										121.02	-32.95										121.04	-32.94										121.06	-32.81										121.08	-32.33										121.1	-32.45										121.12	-32.41										121.14	-32.36										121.16	-32.46										121.18	-32.48										121.2	-32.29										121.22	-32.31										121.24	-32.51										121.26	-32.45										121.28	-32.52										121.3	-32.39										121.32	-32.35										121.34	-32.28										121.36	-32.35										121.38	-32.6										121.4	-32.32										121.42	-32.4										121.44	-32.25										121.46	-32.33										121.48	-32.37										121.5	-32.15										121.52	-32.34										121.54	-32.38										121.56	-32.14										121.58	-32.11										121.6	-32.12										121.62	-32.41										121.64	-32.32										121.66	-32.3										121.68	-32.32										121.7	-32.43										121.72	-32.3										121.74	-32.26										121.76	-32.25										121.78	-32.4										121.8	-32.37										121.82	-32.26										121.84	-32.36										121.86	-32.43										121.88	-32.41										121.9	-32.58										121.92	-32.57										121.94	-32.63										121.96	-32.62										121.98	-32.55										122	-32.62										122.02	-32.61										122.04	-32.72										122.06	-32.69										122.08	-32.48										122.1	-32.53										122.12	-32.38										122.14	-32.32										122.16	-32.64										122.18	-32.85										122.2	-32.66										122.22	-32.66										122.24	-32.51										122.26	-32.56										122.28	-32.56																				HumanCulture_MidEastIntervals_200.0_yr_bin10.0yr_event_frequency_curve	point	250									nopoints	line	0	100									0.005	89										0.015	55										0.025	55										0.035	55										0.045	55										0.055	52										0.065	45										0.075	43										0.085	39										0.095	32										0.105	32										0.115	32										0.125	32										0.135	32										0.145	29										0.155	29										0.165	21										0.175	20										0.185	17										0.195	19										0.205	13										0.215	17										0.225	17										0.235	17										0.245	17										0.255	18										0.265	17										0.275	21										0.285	25										0.295	27										0.305	55										0.315	54										0.325	56										0.335	57										0.345	59										0.355	66										0.365	65										0.375	65										0.385	64										0.395	65										0.405	66										0.415	66										0.425	67										0.435	68										0.445	71										0.455	71										0.465	73										0.475	69										0.485	64										0.495	62										0.505	36										0.515	38										0.525	36										0.535	38										0.545	37										0.555	35										0.565	35										0.575	37										0.585	38										0.595	40										0.605	40										0.615	40										0.625	39										0.635	37										0.645	34										0.655	33										0.665	31										0.675	31										0.685	33										0.695	33										0.705	38										0.715	38										0.725	40										0.735	37										0.745	37										0.755	36										0.765	36										0.775	34										0.785	32										0.795	29										0.805	30										0.815	30										0.825	30										0.835	29										0.845	32										0.855	36										0.865	39										0.875	39										0.885	37										0.895	37										0.905	38										0.915	36										0.925	34										0.935	35										0.945	34										0.955	30										0.965	30										0.975	30										0.985	32										0.995	32										1.005	30										1.015	30										1.025	32										1.035	32										1.045	29										1.055	35										1.065	33										1.075	33										1.085	33										1.095	33										1.105	31										1.115	31										1.125	31										1.135	30										1.145	34										1.155	36										1.165	42										1.175	44										1.185	43										1.195	43										1.205	40										1.215	40										1.225	41										1.235	41										1.245	41										1.255	34										1.265	33										1.275	33										1.285	34										1.295	34										1.305	47										1.315	47										1.325	49										1.335	50										1.345	46										1.355	44										1.365	38										1.375	36										1.385	35										1.395	35										1.405	39										1.415	39										1.425	38										1.435	38										1.445	38										1.455	35										1.465	35										1.475	35										1.485	38										1.495	47										1.505	34										1.515	34										1.525	32										1.535	31										1.545	31										1.555	32										1.565	32										1.575	32										1.585	38										1.595	38										1.605	32										1.615	32										1.625	30										1.635	30										1.645	30										1.655	33										1.665	33										1.675	33										1.685	29										1.695	20										1.705	14										1.715	14										1.725	14										1.735	14										1.745	16										1.755	15										1.765	15										1.775	15										1.785	9										1.795	9										1.805	25										1.815	25										1.825	25										1.835	30										1.845	31										1.855	29										1.865	29										1.875	31										1.885	31										1.895	31										1.905	45										1.915	45										1.925	45										1.935	45										1.945	45										1.955	47										1.965	47										1.975	47										1.985	47										1.995	47										2.005	33										2.015	36										2.025	36										2.035	35										2.045	34										2.055	33										2.065	34										2.075	32										2.085	32										2.095	32										2.105	31										2.115	23										2.125	23										2.135	28										2.145	36										2.155	36										2.165	35										2.175	35										2.185	35										2.195	35										2.205	35										2.215	32										2.225	31										2.235	27										2.245	27										2.255	26										2.265	26										2.275	25										2.285	29										2.295	31										2.305	31										2.315	47										2.325	47										2.335	42										2.345	34										2.355	33										2.365	38										2.375	38										2.385	38										2.395	38										2.405	38										2.415	41										2.425	45										2.435	45										2.445	45										2.455	45										2.465	45										2.475	47										2.485	43										2.495	41										2.505	41										2.515	23										2.525	24										2.535	24										2.545	23										2.555	23										2.565	20										2.575	20										2.585	21										2.595	21										2.605	21										2.615	25										2.625	21										2.635	21										2.645	21										2.655	21										2.665	21										2.675	19										2.685	19										2.695	20										2.705	20										2.715	18										2.725	17										2.735	17										2.745	16										2.755	16										2.765	14										2.775	14										2.785	14										2.795	14										2.805	14										2.815	28										2.825	28										2.835	28										2.845	28										2.855	31										2.865	32										2.875	34										2.885	34										2.895	33										2.905	33										2.915	37										2.925	37										2.935	37										2.945	37										2.955	37										2.965	38										2.975	38										2.985	37										2.995	38										3.005	38										3.015	20										3.025	20										3.035	20										3.045	20										3.055	18										3.065	19										3.075	17										3.085	18										3.095	19										3.105	19										3.115	16										3.125	16										3.135	16										3.145	17										3.155	17										3.165	19										3.175	19										3.185	20										3.195	20										3.205	20										3.215	16										3.225	16										3.235	16										3.245	16										3.255	15										3.265	14										3.275	14										3.285	17										3.295	16										3.305	16										3.315	26										3.325	26										3.335	26										3.345	27										3.355	27										3.365	27										3.375	27										3.385	26										3.395	25										3.405	25										3.415	35										3.425	35										3.435	35										3.445	35										3.455	35										3.465	37										3.475	37										3.485	33										3.495	34										3.505	34										3.515	25										3.525	25										3.535	25										3.545	23										3.555	23										3.565	22										3.575	22										3.585	22										3.595	22										3.605	23										3.615	20										3.625	21										3.635	21										3.645	21										3.655	21										3.665	18										3.675	18										3.685	18										3.695	17										3.705	17										3.715	16										3.725	16										3.735	16										3.745	16										3.755	16										3.765	13										3.775	13										3.785	13										3.795	16										3.805	15										3.815	38										3.825	37										3.835	37										3.845	37										3.855	37										3.865	37										3.875	37										3.885	37										3.895	37										3.905	37										3.915	42										3.925	42										3.935	42										3.945	42										3.955	42										3.965	42										3.975	42										3.985	44										3.995	44										4.005	44										4.015	18										4.025	18										4.035	18										4.045	18										4.055	18										4.065	18										4.075	18										4.085	18										4.095	18										4.105	19										4.115	13										4.125	13										4.135	13										4.145	13										4.155	13										4.165	17										4.175	17										4.185	15										4.195	12										4.205	12										4.215	6										4.225	6										4.235	6										4.245	6										4.255	6										4.265	6										4.275	6										4.285	6										4.295	7										4.305	6										4.315	14										4.325	14										4.335	15										4.345	15										4.355	15										4.365	12										4.375	12										4.385	12										4.395	12										4.405	12										4.415	16										4.425	16										4.435	16										4.445	16										4.455	16										4.465	22										4.475	22										4.485	22										4.495	21										4.505	21										4.515	15										4.525	15										4.535	14										4.545	14										4.555	14										4.565	14										4.575	14										4.585	14										4.595	14										4.605	14										4.615	13										4.625	13										4.635	13										4.645	13										4.655	13										4.665	7										4.675	7										4.685	7										4.695	7										4.705	7										4.715	7										4.725	7										4.735	7										4.745	7										4.755	7										4.765	6										4.775	6										4.785	6										4.795	6										4.805	6										4.815	16										4.825	16										4.835	16										4.845	16										4.855	16										4.865	18										4.875	18										4.885	18										4.895	18										4.905	18										4.915	18										4.925	18										4.935	18										4.945	18										4.955	18										4.965	22										4.975	22										4.985	22										4.995	22										5.005	22										5.015	12										5.025	12										5.035	12										5.045	12										5.055	12										5.065	10										5.075	10										5.085	10										5.095	10										5.105	10										5.115	9										5.125	9										5.135	9										5.145	9										5.155	9										5.165	5										5.175	5										5.185	5										5.195	5										5.205	5										5.215	2										5.225	2										5.235	2										5.245	2										5.255	2										5.265	2										5.275	2										5.285	2										5.295	2										5.305	2										5.315	15										5.325	15										5.335	15										5.345	15										5.355	15										5.365	15										5.375	15										5.385	15										5.395	15										5.405	15										5.415	19										5.425	19										5.435	19										5.445	19										5.455	19										5.465	19										5.475	19										5.485	19										5.495	19										5.505	19										5.515	5										5.525	5										5.535	5										5.545	5										5.555	5										5.565	6										5.575	6										5.585	6										5.595	6										5.605	6										5.615	3										5.625	3										5.635	3										5.645	3										5.655	3										5.665	3										5.675	3										5.685	3										5.695	3										5.705	3										5.715	4										5.725	4										5.735	4										5.745	4										5.755	4										5.765	3										5.775	3										5.785	3										5.795	3										5.805	3										5.815	18										5.825	18										5.835	18										5.845	18										5.855	18										5.865	18										5.875	18										5.885	18										5.895	18										5.905	18										5.915	16										5.925	16										5.935	16										5.945	16										5.955	16										5.965	16										5.975	16										5.985	16										5.995	16										6.005	16										6.015	5										6.025	5										6.035	6										6.045	6										6.055	6										6.065	6										6.075	6										6.085	6										6.095	6										6.105	6										6.115	9										6.125	9										6.135	9										6.145	9										6.155	9										6.165	9										6.175	9										6.185	9										6.195	9										6.205	9										6.215	4										6.225	4										6.235	3										6.245	3										6.255	4										6.265	4										6.275	4										6.285	4										6.295	4										6.305	4										6.315	12										6.325	12										6.335	12										6.345	12										6.355	12										6.365	12										6.375	12										6.385	12										6.395	12										6.405	12										6.415	12										6.425	12										6.435	12										6.445	12										6.455	11										6.465	11										6.475	12										6.485	12										6.495	12										6.505	12										6.515	1										6.525	1										6.535	1										6.545	1										6.555	1										6.565	1										6.575	1										6.585	1										6.595	1										6.605	1										6.615	3										6.625	3										6.635	3										6.645	3										6.655	3										6.665	5										6.675	4										6.685	4										6.695	5										6.705	5										6.715	5										6.725	5										6.735	5										6.745	5										6.755	5										6.765	5										6.775	5										6.785	5										6.795	5										6.805	5										6.815	30										6.825	30										6.835	30										6.845	30										6.855	30										6.865	28										6.875	28										6.885	28										6.895	27										6.905	27										6.915	29										6.925	29										6.935	29										6.945	29										6.955	29										6.965	29										6.975	29										6.985	29										6.995	29										7.005	29										7.015	2										7.025	2										7.035	2										7.045	2										7.055	2										7.065	2										7.075	2										7.085	2										7.095	2										7.105	2										7.115	0										7.125	0										7.135	0										7.145	0										7.155	0										7.165	0										7.175	0										7.185	0										7.195	0										7.205	0										7.215	1										7.225	1										7.235	1										7.245	1										7.255	1										7.265	1										7.275	1										7.285	1										7.295	1										7.305	1										7.315	7										7.325	7										7.335	7										7.345	7										7.355	7										7.365	7										7.375	7										7.385	7										7.395	7										7.405	7										7.415	6										7.425	6										7.435	6										7.445	6										7.455	6										7.465	6										7.475	6										7.485	6										7.495	6										7.505	6										7.515	1										7.525	1										7.535	1										7.545	1										7.555	1										7.565	1										7.575	1										7.585	1										7.595	1										7.605	1										7.615	1										7.625	1										7.635	1										7.645	1										7.655	1										7.665	1										7.675	1										7.685	1										7.695	1										7.705	1										7.715	1										7.725	1										7.735	1										7.745	1										7.755	1										7.765	1										7.775	1										7.785	1										7.795	1										7.805	1										7.815	25										7.825	25										7.835	25										7.845	25										7.855	25										7.865	25										7.875	25										7.885	25										7.895	25										7.905	25										7.915	27										7.925	27										7.935	27										7.945	27										7.955	27										7.965	27										7.975	27										7.985	27										7.995	27										8.005	27										8.015	6										8.025	6										8.035	6										8.045	6										8.055	6										8.065	6										8.075	6										8.085	6										8.095	6										8.105	6										8.115	4										8.125	4										8.135	4										8.145	4										8.155	4										8.165	4										8.175	4										8.185	4										8.195	4										8.205	4										8.215	1										8.225	1										8.235	1										8.245	1										8.255	1										8.265	1										8.275	1										8.285	1										8.295	1										8.305	1										8.315	7										8.325	7										8.335	7										8.345	7										8.355	7										8.365	7										8.375	7										8.385	7										8.395	7										8.405	7										8.415	7										8.425	7										8.435	7										8.445	7										8.455	7										8.465	7										8.475	7										8.485	7										8.495	7										8.505	7										8.515	0										8.525	0										8.535	0										8.545	0										8.555	0										8.565	0										8.575	0										8.585	0										8.595	0										8.605	0										8.615	1										8.625	1										8.635	1										8.645	1										8.655	1										8.665	1										8.675	1										8.685	1										8.695	1										8.705	1										8.715	1										8.725	1										8.735	1										8.745	1										8.755	1										8.765	1										8.775	1										8.785	1										8.795	1										8.805	1										8.815	10										8.825	10										8.835	10										8.845	10										8.855	10										8.865	10										8.875	10										8.885	10										8.895	10										8.905	10										8.915	10										8.925	10										8.935	10										8.945	10										8.955	10										8.965	10										8.975	10										8.985	10										8.995	10										9.005	10										9.015	0										9.025	0										9.035	0										9.045	0										9.055	0										9.065	0										9.075	0										9.085	0										9.095	0										9.105	0										9.115	0										9.125	0										9.135	0										9.145	0										9.155	0										9.165	0										9.175	0										9.185	0										9.195	0										9.205	0										9.215	1										9.225	1										9.235	1										9.245	1										9.255	1										9.265	1										9.275	1										9.285	1										9.295	1										9.305	1										9.315	5										9.325	5										9.335	5										9.345	5										9.355	5										9.365	5										9.375	5										9.385	5										9.395	5										9.405	5										9.415	9										9.425	9										9.435	9										9.445	9										9.455	9										9.465	9										9.475	9										9.485	9										9.495	9										9.505	9										9.515	5										9.525	5										9.535	5										9.545	5										9.555	5										9.565	5										9.575	5										9.585	5										9.595	5										9.605	5										9.615	0										9.625	0										9.635	0										9.645	0										9.655	0										9.665	0										9.675	0										9.685	0										9.695	0										9.705	0										9.715	0										9.725	0										9.735	0										9.745	0										9.755	0										9.765	0										9.775	0										9.785	0										9.795	0										9.805	0										9.815	13										9.825	13										9.835	13										9.845	13										9.855	13										9.865	13										9.875	13										9.885	13										9.895	13										9.905	13										9.915	13										9.925	13										9.935	13										9.945	13										9.955	13										9.965	13										9.975	13										9.985	13										9.995	13										10.005	13										10.015	0										10.025	0										10.035	0										10.045	0										10.055	0										10.065	0										10.075	0										10.085	0										10.095	0										10.105	0										10.115	3										10.125	3										10.135	3										10.145	3										10.155	3										10.165	3										10.175	3										10.185	3										10.195	3										10.205	3										10.215	3										10.225	3										10.235	3										10.245	3										10.255	3										10.265	3										10.275	3										10.285	3										10.295	3										10.305	3										10.315	6										10.325	6										10.335	6										10.345	6										10.355	6										10.365	6										10.375	6										10.385	6										10.395	6										10.405	6										10.415	6										10.425	6										10.435	6										10.445	6										10.455	6										10.465	6										10.475	6										10.485	6										10.495	6										10.505	6										10.515	0										10.525	0										10.535	0										10.545	0										10.555	0										10.565	0										10.575	0										10.585	0										10.595	0										10.605	0										10.615	1										10.625	1										10.635	1										10.645	1										10.655	1										10.665	1										10.675	1										10.685	1										10.695	1										10.705	1										10.715	1										10.725	1										10.735	1										10.745	1										10.755	1										10.765	1										10.775	1										10.785	1										10.795	1										10.805	1										10.815	15										10.825	15										10.835	15										10.845	15										10.855	15										10.865	15										10.875	15										10.885	15										10.895	15										10.905	15										10.915	16										10.925	16										10.935	16										10.945	16										10.955	16										10.965	16										10.975	16										10.985	16										10.995	16										11.005	16										11.015	1										11.025	1										11.035	1										11.045	1										11.055	1										11.065	1										11.075	1										11.085	1										11.095	1										11.105	1										11.115	0										11.125	0										11.135	0										11.145	0										11.155	0										11.165	0										11.175	0										11.185	0										11.195	0										11.205	0										11.215	0										11.225	0										11.235	0										11.245	0										11.255	0										11.265	0										11.275	0										11.285	0										11.295	0										11.305	0										11.315	3										11.325	3										11.335	3										11.345	3										11.355	3										11.365	3										11.375	3										11.385	3										11.395	3										11.405	3										11.415	3										11.425	3										11.435	3										11.445	3										11.455	3										11.465	3										11.475	3										11.485	3										11.495	3										11.505	3										11.515	0										11.525	0										11.535	0										11.545	0										11.555	0										11.565	0										11.575	0										11.585	0										11.595	2										11.605	2										11.615	2										11.625	2										11.635	2										11.645	2										11.655	2										11.665	2										11.675	2										11.685	2										11.695	2										11.705	2										11.715	2										11.725	2										11.735	2										11.745	2										11.755	2										11.765	2										11.775	2										11.785	2										11.795	0										11.805	0										11.815	5										11.825	5										11.835	5										11.845	5										11.855	5										11.865	5										11.875	5										11.885	5										11.895	5										11.905	5										11.915	5										11.925	5										11.935	5										11.945	5										11.955	5										11.965	5										11.975	5										11.985	5										11.995	5										12.005	5										12.015	2										12.025	2										12.035	2										12.045	2										12.055	2										12.065	2										12.075	2										12.085	2										12.095	2										12.105	2										12.115	2										12.125	2										12.135	2										12.145	2										12.155	2										12.165	2										12.175	2										12.185	2										12.195	2										12.205	2										12.215	0										12.225	0										12.235	0										12.245	0										12.255	0										12.265	0										12.275	0										12.285	0										12.295	0										12.305	0										12.315	4										12.325	4										12.335	4										12.345	4										12.355	4										12.365	4										12.375	4										12.385	4										12.395	4										12.405	4										12.415	4										12.425	4										12.435	4										12.445	4										12.455	4										12.465	4										12.475	4										12.485	4										12.495	4										12.505	4										12.515	0										12.525	0										12.535	0										12.545	0										12.555	0										12.565	0										12.575	0										12.585	0										12.595	0										12.605	0										12.615	0										12.625	0										12.635	0										12.645	0										12.655	0										12.665	0										12.675	0										12.685	0										12.695	0										12.705	0										12.715	0										12.725	0										12.735	0										12.745	0										12.755	0										12.765	0										12.775	0										12.785	0										12.795	0										12.805	0										12.815	2										12.825	2										12.835	2										12.845	2										12.855	2										12.865	2										12.875	2										12.885	2										12.895	2										12.905	2										12.915	2										12.925	2										12.935	2										12.945	2										12.955	2										12.965	2										12.975	2										12.985	2										12.995	2										13.005	2										13.015	0										13.025	0										13.035	0										13.045	0										13.055	0										13.065	0										13.075	0										13.085	0										13.095	0										13.105	0										13.115	0										13.125	0										13.135	0										13.145	0										13.155	0										13.165	0										13.175	0										13.185	0										13.195	0										13.205	0										13.215	0										13.225	0										13.235	0										13.245	0										13.255	0										13.265	0										13.275	0										13.285	0										13.295	0										13.305	0										13.315	0										13.325	0										13.335	0										13.345	0										13.355	0										13.365	0										13.375	0										13.385	0										13.395	0										13.405	0										13.415	0										13.425	0										13.435	0										13.445	0										13.455	0										13.465	0										13.475	0										13.485	0										13.495	0										13.505	0										13.515	0										13.525	0										13.535	0										13.545	0										13.555	0										13.565	0										13.575	0										13.585	0										13.595	0										13.605	0										13.615	0										13.625	0										13.635	0										13.645	0										13.655	0										13.665	0										13.675	0										13.685	0										13.695	0										13.705	0										13.715	0										13.725	0										13.735	0										13.745	0										13.755	0										13.765	0										13.775	0										13.785	0										13.795	0										13.805	0										13.815	1										13.825	1										13.835	1										13.845	1										13.855	1										13.865	1										13.875	1										13.885	1										13.895	1										13.905	1										13.915	1										13.925	1										13.935	1										13.945	1										13.955	1										13.965	1										13.975	1										13.985	1										13.995	1										14.005	1										14.015	0										14.025	0										14.035	0										14.045	0										14.055	0										14.065	0										14.075	0										14.085	0										14.095	0										14.105	0										14.115	0										14.125	0										14.135	0										14.145	0										14.155	0										14.165	0										14.175	0										14.185	0										14.195	0										14.205	0										14.215	0										14.225	0										14.235	0										14.245	0										14.255	0										14.265	0										14.275	0										14.285	0										14.295	0										14.305	0										14.315	0										14.325	0										14.335	0										14.345	0										14.355	0										14.365	0										14.375	0										14.385	0										14.395	0										14.405	0										14.415	0										14.425	0										14.435	0										14.445	0										14.455	0										14.465	0										14.475	0										14.485	0										14.495	0										14.505	0										14.515	0										14.525	0										14.535	0										14.545	0										14.555	0										14.565	0										14.575	0										14.585	0										14.595	0										14.605	0										14.615	0										14.625	0										14.635	0										14.645	0										14.655	0										14.665	0										14.675	0										14.685	0										14.695	0										14.705	0										14.715	0										14.725	0										14.735	0										14.745	0										14.755	0										14.765	0										14.775	0										14.785	0										14.795	0										14.805	0										14.815	2										14.825	2										14.835	2										14.845	2										14.855	2										14.865	2										14.875	2										14.885	2										14.895	2										14.905	2										14.915	2										14.925	2										14.935	2										14.945	2										14.955	2										14.965	2										14.975	2										14.985	2										14.995	2										15.005	2										15.015	0										15.025	0										15.035	0										15.045	0										15.055	0										15.065	0										15.075	0										15.085	0										15.095	0										15.105	0										15.115	0										15.125	0										15.135	0										15.145	0										15.155	0										15.165	0										15.175	0										15.185	0										15.195	0										15.205	0										15.215	0										15.225	0										15.235	0										15.245	0										15.255	0										15.265	0										15.275	0										15.285	0										15.295	0										15.305	0										15.315	0										15.325	0										15.335	0										15.345	0										15.355	0										15.365	0										15.375	0										15.385	0										15.395	0										15.405	0										15.415	0										15.425	0										15.435	0										15.445	0										15.455	0										15.465	0										15.475	0										15.485	0										15.495	0										15.505	0										15.515	0										15.525	0										15.535	0										15.545	0										15.555	0										15.565	0										15.575	0										15.585	0										15.595	0										15.605	0										15.615	0										15.625	0										15.635	0										15.645	0										15.655	0										15.665	0										15.675	0										15.685	0										15.695	0										15.705	0										15.715	0										15.725	0										15.735	0										15.745	0										15.755	0										15.765	0										15.775	0										15.785	0										15.795	0										15.805	0										15.815	0										15.825	0										15.835	0										15.845	0										15.855	0										15.865	0										15.875	0										15.885	0										15.895	0										15.905	0										15.915	0										15.925	0										15.935	0										15.945	0										15.955	0										15.965	0										15.975	0										15.985	0										15.995	0										16.005	0										16.015	0										16.025	0										16.035	0										16.045	0										16.055	0										16.065	0										16.075	0										16.085	0										16.095	0										16.105	0										16.115	0										16.125	0										16.135	0										16.145	0										16.155	0										16.165	0										16.175	0										16.185	0										16.195	0										16.205	0										16.215	0										16.225	0										16.235	0										16.245	0										16.255	0										16.265	0										16.275	0										16.285	0										16.295	0										16.305	0										16.315	2										16.325	2										16.335	2										16.345	2										16.355	2										16.365	2										16.375	2										16.385	2										16.395	2										16.405	2										16.415	2										16.425	2										16.435	2										16.445	2										16.455	2										16.465	2										16.475	2										16.485	2										16.495	2										16.505	2										16.515	0										16.525	1										16.535	1										16.545	1										16.555	1										16.565	1										16.575	1										16.585	1										16.595	1										16.605	1										16.615	1										16.625	1										16.635	1										16.645	1										16.655	1										16.665	1										16.675	1										16.685	1										16.695	1										16.705	1										16.715	1										16.725	0										16.735	0										16.745	0										16.755	0										16.765	0										16.775	0										16.785	0										16.795	0										16.805	0										16.815	1										16.825	1										16.835	1										16.845	1										16.855	1										16.865	1										16.875	1										16.885	1										16.895	1										16.905	1										16.915	1										16.925	1										16.935	1										16.945	1										16.955	1										16.965	1										16.975	1										16.985	1										16.995	1										17.005	1										17.015	0										17.025	0										17.035	0										17.045	0										17.055	0										17.065	0										17.075	0										17.085	0										17.095	0										17.105	0										17.115	0										17.125	0										17.135	0										17.145	0										17.155	0										17.165	0										17.175	0										17.185	0										17.195	0										17.205	0										17.215	0										17.225	0										17.235	0										17.245	0										17.255	0										17.265	0										17.275	0										17.285	0										17.295	0										17.305	0										17.315	0										17.325	0										17.335	0										17.345	0										17.355	0										17.365	0										17.375	0										17.385	0										17.395	0										17.405	0										17.415	0										17.425	0										17.435	0										17.445	0										17.455	0										17.465	0										17.475	0										17.485	0										17.495	0										17.505	0										17.515	0										17.525	0										17.535	0										17.545	0										17.555	0										17.565	0										17.575	0										17.585	0										17.595	0										17.605	0										17.615	0										17.625	0										17.635	0										17.645	0										17.655	0										17.665	0										17.675	0										17.685	0										17.695	0										17.705	0										17.715	0										17.725	0										17.735	0										17.745	0										17.755	0										17.765	0										17.775	0										17.785	0										17.795	0										17.805	0										17.815	5										17.825	5										17.835	5										17.845	5										17.855	5										17.865	5										17.875	5										17.885	5										17.895	5										17.905	5										17.915	5										17.925	5										17.935	5										17.945	5										17.955	5										17.965	5										17.975	5										17.985	5										17.995	5										18.005	0										18.015	0										18.025	0										18.035	0										18.045	0										18.055	0										18.065	0										18.075	0										18.085	0										18.095	0										18.105	0										18.115	0										18.125	0										18.135	0										18.145	0										18.155	0										18.165	0										18.175	0										18.185	0										18.195	0										18.205	0										18.215	0										18.225	0										18.235	0										18.245	0										18.255	0										18.265	0										18.275	0										18.285	0										18.295	0										18.305	0										18.315	0										18.325	0										18.335	0										18.345	0										18.355	0										18.365	0										18.375	0										18.385	0										18.395	0										18.405	0										18.415	0										18.425	0										18.435	0										18.445	0										18.455	0										18.465	0										18.475	0										18.485	0										18.495	0										18.505	0										18.515	0										18.525	0										18.535	0										18.545	0										18.555	0										18.565	0										18.575	0										18.585	0										18.595	0										18.605	0										18.615	0										18.625	0										18.635	0										18.645	0										18.655	0										18.665	0										18.675	0										18.685	0										18.695	0										18.705	0										18.715	0										18.725	0										18.735	0										18.745	0										18.755	0										18.765	0										18.775	0										18.785	0										18.795	0										18.805	1										18.815	1										18.825	1										18.835	1										18.845	1										18.855	1										18.865	1										18.875	1										18.885	1										18.895	1										18.905	1										18.915	1										18.925	1										18.935	1										18.945	1										18.955	1										18.965	1										18.975	1										18.985	1										18.995	1										19.005	0										19.015	0										19.025	0										19.035	0										19.045	0										19.055	0										19.065	0										19.075	0										19.085	0										19.095	0										19.105	0										19.115	0										19.125	0										19.135	0										19.145	0										19.155	0										19.165	0										19.175	0										19.185	0										19.195	0										19.205	0										19.215	0										19.225	0										19.235	0										19.245	0										19.255	0										19.265	0										19.275	0										19.285	0										19.295	0										19.305	0										19.315	0										19.325	0										19.335	0										19.345	0										19.355	0										19.365	0										19.375	0										19.385	0										19.395	0										19.405	0										19.415	0										19.425	0										19.435	0										19.445	0										19.455	0										19.465	0										19.475	0										19.485	0										19.495	0										19.505	0										19.515	0										19.525	0										19.535	0										19.545	0										19.555	0										19.565	0										19.575	0										19.585	0										19.595	0										19.605	0										19.615	0										19.625	0										19.635	0										19.645	0										19.655	0										19.665	0										19.675	0										19.685	0										19.695	0										19.705	0										19.715	0										19.725	0										19.735	0										19.745	0										19.755	0										19.765	0										19.775	0										19.785	0										19.795	0																				HumanCulture_MidEastIntervals_200.0_yr_bin20.0yr_event_frequency_curve	point	250									nopoints	line	0	100									0.01	89										0.03	55										0.05	55										0.07	45										0.09	39										0.11	32										0.13	32										0.15	29										0.17	21										0.19	17										0.21	19										0.23	17										0.25	17										0.27	17										0.29	23										0.31	31										0.33	56										0.35	59										0.37	65										0.39	64										0.41	66										0.43	67										0.45	71										0.47	73										0.49	64										0.51	36										0.53	36										0.55	37										0.57	35										0.59	38										0.61	40										0.63	39										0.65	34										0.67	31										0.69	33										0.71	38										0.73	40										0.75	37										0.77	36										0.79	32										0.81	30										0.83	30										0.85	32										0.87	39										0.89	37										0.91	38										0.93	34										0.95	34										0.97	30										0.99	32										1.01	30										1.03	32										1.05	29										1.07	33										1.09	33										1.11	31										1.13	31										1.15	34										1.17	42										1.19	43										1.21	40										1.23	41										1.25	41										1.27	33										1.29	34										1.31	47										1.33	49										1.35	46										1.37	38										1.39	35										1.41	39										1.43	38										1.45	38										1.47	35										1.49	38										1.51	34										1.53	32										1.55	31										1.57	32										1.59	38										1.61	32										1.63	30										1.65	30										1.67	33										1.69	29										1.71	14										1.73	14										1.75	16										1.77	15										1.79	9										1.81	25										1.83	25										1.85	31										1.87	29										1.89	31										1.91	45										1.93	45										1.95	45										1.97	47										1.99	47										2.01	33										2.03	36										2.05	34										2.07	34										2.09	32										2.11	23										2.13	23										2.15	36										2.17	35										2.19	35										2.21	34										2.23	31										2.25	27										2.27	25										2.29	30										2.31	46										2.33	47										2.35	34										2.37	38										2.39	38										2.41	41										2.43	45										2.45	45										2.47	45										2.49	42										2.51	24										2.53	24										2.55	23										2.57	20										2.59	21										2.61	25										2.63	21										2.65	21										2.67	21										2.69	20										2.71	18										2.73	17										2.75	16										2.77	14										2.79	14										2.81	28										2.83	28										2.85	28										2.87	32										2.89	33										2.91	37										2.93	37										2.95	37										2.97	38										2.99	37										3.01	20										3.03	20										3.05	20										3.07	19										3.09	18										3.11	16										3.13	16										3.15	17										3.17	19										3.19	21										3.21	16										3.23	16										3.25	16										3.27	14										3.29	17										3.31	26										3.33	26										3.35	27										3.37	27										3.39	25										3.41	35										3.43	35										3.45	35										3.47	37										3.49	34										3.51	25										3.53	25										3.55	23										3.57	22										3.59	22										3.61	20										3.63	21										3.65	21										3.67	18										3.69	17										3.71	16										3.73	16										3.75	16										3.77	13										3.79	13										3.81	38										3.83	37										3.85	37										3.87	37										3.89	37										3.91	42										3.93	42										3.95	42										3.97	42										3.99	44										4.01	18										4.03	18										4.05	18										4.07	18										4.09	18										4.11	13										4.13	13										4.15	13										4.17	17										4.19	15										4.21	12										4.23	6										4.25	6										4.27	6										4.29	6										4.31	6										4.33	14										4.35	15										4.37	12										4.39	12										4.41	12										4.43	16										4.45	16										4.47	22										4.49	22										4.51	21										4.53	15										4.55	14										4.57	14										4.59	14										4.61	14										4.63	13										4.65	13										4.67	7										4.69	7										4.71	7										4.73	7										4.75	7										4.77	6										4.79	6										4.81	6										4.83	16										4.85	16										4.87	18										4.89	18										4.91	18										4.93	18										4.95	18										4.97	22										4.99	22										5.01	22										5.03	12										5.05	12										5.07	10										5.09	10										5.11	10										5.13	9										5.15	9										5.17	5										5.19	5										5.21	5										5.23	2										5.25	2										5.27	2										5.29	2										5.31	2										5.33	15										5.35	15										5.37	15										5.39	15										5.41	15										5.43	19										5.45	19										5.47	19										5.49	19										5.51	19										5.53	5										5.55	5										5.57	6										5.59	6										5.61	6										5.63	3										5.65	3										5.67	3										5.69	3										5.71	3										5.73	4										5.75	4										5.77	3										5.79	3										5.81	3										5.83	18										5.85	18										5.87	18										5.89	18										5.91	18										5.93	16										5.95	16										5.97	16										5.99	16										6.01	16										6.03	5										6.05	6										6.07	6										6.09	6										6.11	6										6.13	9										6.15	9										6.17	9										6.19	9										6.21	9										6.23	4										6.25	3										6.27	4										6.29	4										6.31	4										6.33	12										6.35	12										6.37	12										6.39	12										6.41	12										6.43	12										6.45	12										6.47	11										6.49	12										6.51	12										6.53	1										6.55	1										6.57	1										6.59	1										6.61	1										6.63	3										6.65	3										6.67	5										6.69	4										6.71	5										6.73	5										6.75	5										6.77	5										6.79	5										6.81	5										6.83	30										6.85	30										6.87	28										6.89	28										6.91	27										6.93	29										6.95	29										6.97	29										6.99	29										7.01	29										7.03	2										7.05	2										7.07	2										7.09	2										7.11	2										7.13	0										7.15	0										7.17	0										7.19	0										7.21	0										7.23	1										7.25	1										7.27	1										7.29	1										7.31	1										7.33	7										7.35	7										7.37	7										7.39	7										7.41	7										7.43	6										7.45	6										7.47	6										7.49	6										7.51	6										7.53	1										7.55	1										7.57	1										7.59	1										7.61	1										7.63	1										7.65	1										7.67	1										7.69	1										7.71	1										7.73	1										7.75	1										7.77	1										7.79	1										7.81	1										7.83	25										7.85	25										7.87	25										7.89	25										7.91	25										7.93	27										7.95	27										7.97	27										7.99	27										8.01	27										8.03	6										8.05	6										8.07	6										8.09	6										8.11	6										8.13	4										8.15	4										8.17	4										8.19	4										8.21	4										8.23	1										8.25	1										8.27	1										8.29	1										8.31	1										8.33	7										8.35	7										8.37	7										8.39	7										8.41	7										8.43	7										8.45	7										8.47	7										8.49	7										8.51	7										8.53	0										8.55	0										8.57	0										8.59	0										8.61	0										8.63	1										8.65	1										8.67	1										8.69	1										8.71	1										8.73	1										8.75	1										8.77	1										8.79	1										8.81	1										8.83	10										8.85	10										8.87	10										8.89	10										8.91	10										8.93	10										8.95	10										8.97	10										8.99	10										9.01	10										9.03	0										9.05	0										9.07	0										9.09	0										9.11	0										9.13	0										9.15	0										9.17	0										9.19	0										9.21	0										9.23	1										9.25	1										9.27	1										9.29	1										9.31	1										9.33	5										9.35	5										9.37	5										9.39	5										9.41	5										9.43	9										9.45	9										9.47	9										9.49	9										9.51	9										9.53	5										9.55	5										9.57	5										9.59	5										9.61	5										9.63	0										9.65	0										9.67	0										9.69	0										9.71	0										9.73	0										9.75	0										9.77	0										9.79	0										9.81	0										9.83	13										9.85	13										9.87	13										9.89	13										9.91	13										9.93	13										9.95	13										9.97	13										9.99	13										10.01	13										10.03	0										10.05	0										10.07	0										10.09	0										10.11	0										10.13	3										10.15	3										10.17	3										10.19	3										10.21	3										10.23	3										10.25	3										10.27	3										10.29	3										10.31	3										10.33	6										10.35	6										10.37	6										10.39	6										10.41	6										10.43	6										10.45	6										10.47	6										10.49	6										10.51	6										10.53	0										10.55	0										10.57	0										10.59	0										10.61	0										10.63	1										10.65	1										10.67	1										10.69	1										10.71	1										10.73	1										10.75	1										10.77	1										10.79	1										10.81	1										10.83	15										10.85	15										10.87	15										10.89	15										10.91	15										10.93	16										10.95	16										10.97	16										10.99	16										11.01	16										11.03	1										11.05	1										11.07	1										11.09	1										11.11	1										11.13	0										11.15	0										11.17	0										11.19	0										11.21	0										11.23	0										11.25	0										11.27	0										11.29	0										11.31	0										11.33	3										11.35	3										11.37	3										11.39	3										11.41	3										11.43	3										11.45	3										11.47	3										11.49	3										11.51	3										11.53	0										11.55	0										11.57	0										11.59	0										11.61	2										11.63	2										11.65	2										11.67	2										11.69	2										11.71	2										11.73	2										11.75	2										11.77	2										11.79	2										11.81	0										11.83	5										11.85	5										11.87	5										11.89	5										11.91	5										11.93	5										11.95	5										11.97	5										11.99	5										12.01	5										12.03	2										12.05	2										12.07	2										12.09	2										12.11	2										12.13	2										12.15	2										12.17	2										12.19	2										12.21	2										12.23	0										12.25	0										12.27	0										12.29	0										12.31	0										12.33	4										12.35	4										12.37	4										12.39	4										12.41	4										12.43	4										12.45	4										12.47	4										12.49	4										12.51	4										12.53	0										12.55	0										12.57	0										12.59	0										12.61	0										12.63	0										12.65	0										12.67	0										12.69	0										12.71	0										12.73	0										12.75	0										12.77	0										12.79	0										12.81	0										12.83	2										12.85	2										12.87	2										12.89	2										12.91	2										12.93	2										12.95	2										12.97	2										12.99	2										13.01	2										13.03	0										13.05	0										13.07	0										13.09	0										13.11	0										13.13	0										13.15	0										13.17	0										13.19	0										13.21	0										13.23	0										13.25	0										13.27	0										13.29	0										13.31	0										13.33	0										13.35	0										13.37	0										13.39	0										13.41	0										13.43	0										13.45	0										13.47	0										13.49	0										13.51	0										13.53	0										13.55	0										13.57	0										13.59	0										13.61	0										13.63	0										13.65	0										13.67	0										13.69	0										13.71	0										13.73	0										13.75	0										13.77	0										13.79	0										13.81	0										13.83	1										13.85	1										13.87	1										13.89	1										13.91	1										13.93	1										13.95	1										13.97	1										13.99	1										14.01	1										14.03	0										14.05	0										14.07	0										14.09	0										14.11	0										14.13	0										14.15	0										14.17	0										14.19	0										14.21	0										14.23	0										14.25	0										14.27	0										14.29	0										14.31	0										14.33	0										14.35	0										14.37	0										14.39	0										14.41	0										14.43	0										14.45	0										14.47	0										14.49	0										14.51	0										14.53	0										14.55	0										14.57	0										14.59	0										14.61	0										14.63	0										14.65	0										14.67	0										14.69	0										14.71	0										14.73	0										14.75	0										14.77	0										14.79	0										14.81	0										14.83	2										14.85	2										14.87	2										14.89	2										14.91	2										14.93	2										14.95	2										14.97	2										14.99	2										15.01	2										15.03	0										15.05	0										15.07	0										15.09	0										15.11	0										15.13	0										15.15	0										15.17	0										15.19	0										15.21	0										15.23	0										15.25	0										15.27	0										15.29	0										15.31	0										15.33	0										15.35	0										15.37	0										15.39	0										15.41	0										15.43	0										15.45	0										15.47	0										15.49	0										15.51	0										15.53	0										15.55	0										15.57	0										15.59	0										15.61	0										15.63	0										15.65	0										15.67	0										15.69	0										15.71	0										15.73	0										15.75	0										15.77	0										15.79	0										15.81	0										15.83	0										15.85	0										15.87	0										15.89	0										15.91	0										15.93	0										15.95	0										15.97	0										15.99	0										16.01	0										16.03	0										16.05	0										16.07	0										16.09	0										16.11	0										16.13	0										16.15	0										16.17	0										16.19	0										16.21	0										16.23	0										16.25	0										16.27	0										16.29	0										16.31	0										16.33	2										16.35	2										16.37	2										16.39	2										16.41	2										16.43	2										16.45	2										16.47	2										16.49	2										16.51	2										16.53	1										16.55	1										16.57	1										16.59	1										16.61	1										16.63	1										16.65	1										16.67	1										16.69	1										16.71	1										16.73	0										16.75	0										16.77	0										16.79	0										16.81	0										16.83	1										16.85	1										16.87	1										16.89	1										16.91	1										16.93	1										16.95	1										16.97	1										16.99	1										17.01	1										17.03	0										17.05	0										17.07	0										17.09	0										17.11	0										17.13	0										17.15	0										17.17	0										17.19	0										17.21	0										17.23	0										17.25	0										17.27	0										17.29	0										17.31	0										17.33	0										17.35	0										17.37	0										17.39	0										17.41	0										17.43	0										17.45	0										17.47	0										17.49	0										17.51	0										17.53	0										17.55	0										17.57	0										17.59	0										17.61	0										17.63	0										17.65	0										17.67	0										17.69	0										17.71	0										17.73	0										17.75	0										17.77	0										17.79	0										17.81	0										17.83	5										17.85	5										17.87	5										17.89	5										17.91	5										17.93	5										17.95	5										17.97	5										17.99	5										18.01	5										18.03	0										18.05	0										18.07	0										18.09	0										18.11	0										18.13	0										18.15	0										18.17	0										18.19	0										18.21	0										18.23	0										18.25	0										18.27	0										18.29	0										18.31	0										18.33	0										18.35	0										18.37	0										18.39	0										18.41	0										18.43	0										18.45	0										18.47	0										18.49	0										18.51	0										18.53	0										18.55	0										18.57	0										18.59	0										18.61	0										18.63	0										18.65	0										18.67	0										18.69	0										18.71	0										18.73	0										18.75	0										18.77	0										18.79	0										18.81	0										18.83	1										18.85	1										18.87	1										18.89	1										18.91	1										18.93	1										18.95	1										18.97	1										18.99	1										19.01	1										19.03	0										19.05	0										19.07	0										19.09	0										19.11	0										19.13	0										19.15	0										19.17	0										19.19	0										19.21	0										19.23	0										19.25	0										19.27	0										19.29	0										19.31	0										19.33	0										19.35	0										19.37	0										19.39	0										19.41	0										19.43	0										19.45	0										19.47	0										19.49	0										19.51	0										19.53	0										19.55	0										19.57	0										19.59	0										19.61	0										19.63	0										19.65	0										19.67	0										19.69	0										19.71	0										19.73	0										19.75	0										19.77	0										19.79	0										19.81	0																				HumanCulture_MidEastIntervals_200.0_yr_bin50.0yr_event_frequency_curve	point	250									nopoints	line	0	100									0.025	89										0.075	52										0.125	32										0.175	20										0.225	19										0.275	17										0.325	31										0.375	67										0.425	66										0.475	72										0.525	58										0.575	34										0.625	40										0.675	34										0.725	38										0.775	36										0.825	30										0.875	36										0.925	38										0.975	30										1.025	30										1.075	35										1.125	31										1.175	36										1.225	40										1.275	34										1.325	47										1.375	44										1.425	39										1.475	35										1.525	34										1.575	32										1.625	32										1.675	33										1.725	14										1.775	15										1.825	25										1.875	29										1.925	45										1.975	47										2.025	33										2.075	33										2.125	23										2.175	35										2.225	38										2.275	26										2.325	31										2.375	33										2.425	38										2.475	45										2.525	41										2.575	23										2.625	21										2.675	21										2.725	20										2.775	16										2.825	14										2.875	31										2.925	33										2.975	37										3.025	38										3.075	18										3.125	19										3.175	17										3.225	20										3.275	15										3.325	16										3.375	27										3.425	25										3.475	35										3.525	34										3.575	23										3.625	23										3.675	21										3.725	17										3.775	16										3.825	15										3.875	37										3.925	37										3.975	42										4.025	44										4.075	18										4.125	19										4.175	13										4.225	12										4.275	6										4.325	6										4.375	15										4.425	12										4.475	16										4.525	21										4.575	14										4.625	14										4.675	13										4.725	7										4.775	7										4.825	6										4.875	16										4.925	18										4.975	18										5.025	22										5.075	12										5.125	10										5.175	9										5.225	5										5.275	2										5.325	2										5.375	15										5.425	15										5.475	19										5.525	19										5.575	5										5.625	6										5.675	3										5.725	3										5.775	4										5.825	3										5.875	18										5.925	18										5.975	16										6.025	16										6.075	6										6.125	6										6.175	9										6.225	9										6.275	4										6.325	4										6.375	12										6.425	12										6.475	11										6.525	12										6.575	1										6.625	1										6.675	3										6.725	5										6.775	5										6.825	5										6.875	30										6.925	27										6.975	29										7.025	29										7.075	2										7.125	2										7.175	0										7.225	0										7.275	1										7.325	1										7.375	7										7.425	7										7.475	6										7.525	6										7.575	1										7.625	1										7.675	1										7.725	1										7.775	1										7.825	1										7.875	25										7.925	25										7.975	27										8.025	27										8.075	6										8.125	6										8.175	4										8.225	4										8.275	1										8.325	1										8.375	7										8.425	7										8.475	7										8.525	7										8.575	0										8.625	0										8.675	1										8.725	1										8.775	1										8.825	1										8.875	10										8.925	10										8.975	10										9.025	10										9.075	0										9.125	0										9.175	0										9.225	0										9.275	1										9.325	1										9.375	5										9.425	5										9.475	9										9.525	9										9.575	5										9.625	0										9.675	0										9.725	0										9.775	0										9.825	13										9.875	13										9.925	13										9.975	13										10.025	0										10.075	0										10.125	3										10.175	3										10.225	3										10.275	3										10.325	6										10.375	6										10.425	6										10.475	6										10.525	0										10.575	0										10.625	1										10.675	1										10.725	1										10.775	1										10.825	15										10.875	15										10.925	16										10.975	16										11.025	1										11.075	1										11.125	0										11.175	0										11.225	0										11.275	0										11.325	3										11.375	3										11.425	3										11.475	3										11.525	0										11.575	0										11.625	2										11.675	2										11.725	2										11.775	2										11.825	5										11.875	5										11.925	5										11.975	5										12.025	2										12.075	2										12.125	2										12.175	2										12.225	0										12.275	0										12.325	4										12.375	4										12.425	4										12.475	4										12.525	0										12.575	0										12.625	0										12.675	0										12.725	0										12.775	0										12.825	2										12.875	2										12.925	2										12.975	2										13.025	0										13.075	0										13.125	0										13.175	0										13.225	0										13.275	0										13.325	0										13.375	0										13.425	0										13.475	0										13.525	0										13.575	0										13.625	0										13.675	0										13.725	0										13.775	0										13.825	1										13.875	1										13.925	1										13.975	1										14.025	0										14.075	0										14.125	0										14.175	0										14.225	0										14.275	0										14.325	0										14.375	0										14.425	0										14.475	0										14.525	0										14.575	0										14.625	0										14.675	0										14.725	0										14.775	0										14.825	2										14.875	2										14.925	2										14.975	2										15.025	0										15.075	0										15.125	0										15.175	0										15.225	0										15.275	0										15.325	0										15.375	0										15.425	0										15.475	0										15.525	0										15.575	0										15.625	0										15.675	0										15.725	0										15.775	0										15.825	0										15.875	0										15.925	0										15.975	0										16.025	0										16.075	0										16.125	0										16.175	0										16.225	0										16.275	0										16.325	2										16.375	2										16.425	2										16.475	2										16.525	0										16.575	1										16.625	1										16.675	1										16.725	1										16.775	0										16.825	1										16.875	1										16.925	1										16.975	1										17.025	0										17.075	0										17.125	0										17.175	0										17.225	0										17.275	0										17.325	0										17.375	0										17.425	0										17.475	0										17.525	0										17.575	0										17.625	0										17.675	0										17.725	0										17.775	0										17.825	5										17.875	5										17.925	5										17.975	5										18.025	0										18.075	0										18.125	0										18.175	0										18.225	0										18.275	0										18.325	0										18.375	0										18.425	0										18.475	0										18.525	0										18.575	0										18.625	0										18.675	0										18.725	0										18.775	0										18.825	1										18.875	1										18.925	1										18.975	1										19.025	0										19.075	0										19.125	0										19.175	0										19.225	0										19.275	0										19.325	0										19.375	0										19.425	0										19.475	0										19.525	0										19.575	0										19.625	0										19.675	0										19.725	0										19.775	0																				HumanCulture_MidEastIntervals_200.0_yr_bin100.0yr_event_frequency_curve	point	250									nopoints	line	0	100									0.05	89										0.15	32										0.25	19										0.35	31										0.45	72										0.55	58										0.65	40										0.75	33										0.85	27										0.95	39										1.05	32										1.15	31										1.25	43										1.35	34										1.45	31										1.55	34										1.65	32										1.75	14										1.85	25										1.95	45										2.05	33										2.15	23										2.25	34										2.35	46										2.45	41										2.55	24										2.65	25										2.75	18										2.85	28										2.95	37										3.05	20										3.15	16										3.25	16										3.35	26										3.45	35										3.55	25										3.65	20										3.75	16										3.85	38										3.95	42										4.05	18										4.15	13										4.25	6										4.35	14										4.45	16										4.55	21										4.65	14										4.75	7										4.85	6										4.95	18										5.05	22										5.15	10										5.25	5										5.35	2										5.45	15										5.55	19										5.65	6										5.75	3										5.85	3										5.95	18										6.05	16										6.15	6										6.25	9										6.35	4										6.45	12										6.55	12										6.65	1										6.75	5										6.85	5										6.95	27										7.05	29										7.15	2										7.25	0										7.35	1										7.45	7										7.55	6										7.65	1										7.75	1										7.85	1										7.95	25										8.05	27										8.15	6										8.25	4										8.35	1										8.45	7										8.55	7										8.65	0										8.75	1										8.85	1										8.95	10										9.05	10										9.15	0										9.25	0										9.35	1										9.45	5										9.55	9										9.65	5										9.75	0										9.85	0										9.95	13										10.05	13										10.15	0										10.25	3										10.35	3										10.45	6										10.55	6										10.65	0										10.75	1										10.85	1										10.95	15										11.05	16										11.15	1										11.25	0										11.35	0										11.45	3										11.55	3										11.65	2										11.75	2										11.85	0										11.95	5										12.05	5										12.15	2										12.25	2										12.35	0										12.45	4										12.55	4										12.65	0										12.75	0										12.85	0										12.95	2										13.05	2										13.15	0										13.25	0										13.35	0										13.45	0										13.55	0										13.65	0										13.75	0										13.85	0										13.95	1										14.05	1										14.15	0										14.25	0										14.35	0										14.45	0										14.55	0										14.65	0										14.75	0										14.85	0										14.95	2										15.05	2										15.15	0										15.25	0										15.35	0										15.45	0										15.55	0										15.65	0										15.75	0										15.85	0										15.95	0										16.05	0										16.15	0										16.25	0										16.35	0										16.45	2										16.55	2										16.65	1										16.75	1										16.85	0										16.95	1										17.05	1										17.15	0										17.25	0										17.35	0										17.45	0										17.55	0										17.65	0										17.75	0										17.85	0										17.95	5										18.05	5										18.15	0										18.25	0										18.35	0										18.45	0										18.55	0										18.65	0										18.75	0										18.85	0										18.95	1										19.05	1										19.15	0										19.25	0										19.35	0										19.45	0										19.55	0										19.65	0										19.75	0																				HumanCulture_MidEastIntervals_200.0_yr_bin200.0yr_event_frequency_curve	point	250									nopoints	line	0	100									0.1	89										0.3	19										0.5	72										0.7	34										0.9	27										1.1	32										1.3	43										1.5	35										1.7	38										1.9	9										2.1	47										2.3	35										2.5	38										2.7	31										2.9	28										3.1	20										3.3	16										3.5	35										3.7	20										3.9	38										4.1	18										4.3	6										4.5	16										4.7	13										4.9	16										5.1	12										5.3	2										5.5	19										5.7	3										5.9	18										6.1	5										6.3	4										6.5	12										6.7	3										6.9	30										7.1	2										7.3	1										7.5	6										7.7	1										7.9	25										8.1	6										8.3	1										8.5	7										8.7	0										8.9	1										9.1	10										9.3	0										9.5	5										9.7	5										9.9	0										10.1	13										10.3	3										10.5	6										10.7	0										10.9	1										11.1	16										11.3	0										11.5	3										11.7	2										11.9	0										12.1	5										12.3	2										12.5	4										12.7	0										12.9	0										13.1	2										13.3	0										13.5	0										13.7	0										13.9	0										14.1	1										14.3	0										14.5	0										14.7	0										14.9	0										15.1	2										15.3	0										15.5	0										15.7	0										15.9	0										16.1	0										16.3	0										16.5	2										16.7	1										16.9	0										17.1	1										17.3	0										17.5	0										17.7	0										17.9	0										18.1	5										18.3	0										18.5	0										18.7	0										18.9	0										19.1	1										19.3	0										19.5	0										19.7	0										19.9	0									